"the taiwan precision medicine initiative tpmi a project initiated by the academia sinica in collaboration with 16 major medical centers around taiwan has recruited 565390 participants who consented to provide dna samples for genetic profiling and grant access to their electronic medical records emr for studies to develop precision medicine.
access to the emr is both retrospective and prospective allowing researchers to conduct prospective studies over time.
genetic profiling is done with populationoptimized snp arrays for the han chinese populations that enable genetic analyses such as genomewide association phenomewide association and polygenic risk score studies to evaluate common disease risk and pharmacogenetic response.
furthermore the tpmi participants agree to be contacted for future research opportunities related to their genetic risks and receive personalized genetic risk profiles with health management recommendations.
tpmi has established the tpmi data access platform tdap a central database and analysis platform that both safeguards the security of the data and facilitates academic research.
the tpmi is the largest noneuropean cohort that merges genetic profiles with emr in the world.
with a cohort that can be followed over time it can be utilized to validate genetic risk prediction models conduct clinical trials to show the efficacy of riskbased health management and optimize health policies based on genetic risks.
in this report we describe the tpmi study design the population and genetic characteristics of the tpmi cohort and the power it provides to conduct crucial studies in developing precision medicine on a population and personal level.
as han chinese represent almost 20 of the worlds population the results of tpmi studies will benefit 1.4 billion people around the world and serve as a model for developing populationbased precision medicine."
"rice bran supplementation provides nutrients prebiotics and phytochemicals that enhance gut immunity reduce enteric pathogens in mice and diarrhea in neonatal pigs and warranted attention for improvement of environmental enteric dysfunction eed in children at risk.
eed is a condition that drives childhood stunting via intestinal dysbiosis and impaired nutrient metabolism.
this study investigated effects of rice bran supplementation on growth eed biomarkers gut microbiome and metabolome in weaning infants from 6 to 12 months old in nicaragua and mali.
healthy infants were randomized to a control group or rice bran group that received daily supplementation at increasing doses each month.
stool microbiomes were characterized using 16s rdna amplicon sequencing.
stool metabolomes were analyzed using ultrahighperformance liquidchromatography tandem massspectrometry.
statistical comparisons were completed at 6 8 and 12 months of age.
daily consumption of rice bran was safe and feasible for infant growth decreasing alpha1 antitrypsin levels and modulating gut microbiome and metabolome when compared to control.
rice bran merits investigation as a practical intervention strategy that could decrease eed prevalence and risk for children from low and middleincome countries where rice is grown as a staple food and bran is used as animal feed or wasted."
"sex recognition is facilitated by dimorphism in some traits.
however humans often fail to find the traits that allow to distinguish between sexes in other species.
deep learning has the potential to surpass humans in identifying cryptic differences between sexes but so far has rarely been used to assess sexual dimorphism.
in this study we evaluated i the ability of a finetuned classification neural network efficientnet to find differences between sexes in a species that appears monomorphic to humans the sociable weaver philetairus socius.
we then assessed ii the benefits of gradcam visualisation techniques to understand which parts of the individuals are used by the network to differentiate the sexes.
we trained 10folds crossvalidation models on more than 4500 pictures of the head from more than 1300 individuals.
our results show that the network can predict sex of sociable weavers with an accuracy of 76 which is considerably higher than humans performance and that the model was similarly good at predicting females and males.
when interpreting the probability of being classified to one sex our results further reveal an effect of the interaction of sex with age on the confidence score of the models which shows that younger males are less masculine than older ones and older females more masculine than younger ones.
finally using gradcam we found that the model mostly uses the beak region to predict the sex of individuals.
overall this work shows that artificial intelligence has the potential to be a noninvasive sexing tool surpassing human capabilities and aiding in pinpointing potential cryptic dimorphic body parts that have yet to be identified.
in birds half of the worlds species appear sexually monomorphic to humans and reevaluation of species dimorphism with this type of methods could deepen our understanding of the effect of selection on animal traits."
"objectives interleukin il17a is a key driver of spondyloarthritis spa joint pathology.
we aimed to identify its cellular source in synovial tissue from patients with axial spa axspa and psoriatic arthritis psa.
methods synovial tissue from patients with spa was profiled using singlecell rna sequencingscrnaseq axspa n5 and psa n6 or spatial rna profiling psa n4.
cellphonedb was used to infer cellcell communication.
tissue resident memory th17 trm17like cells were generated in vitro using blood memory cd4 t cells from spa patients.
an epigenetic inhibitor library sirna and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats crispr were used to identify epigenetic regulators for trm17.
results scrnaseq showed that il17a expression in spa synovium was restricted to cd4cxcr6 trm17 cells.
cellcell communication and singlecell spatial analysis support the interaction between trm17 and clec10a dendritic cells which were activated in spa.
both sublining and lining fibroblasts in spa synovium exhibited an enhanced il17a response signature.
trm17like cells generated in vitro phenocopied the trm17 found in joint tissue and produced il17a in response to t cell receptor tcr stimulation but not cytokines.
il23 enhanced tcrmediated il17f and ifngamma but not il17a production.
perturbation of brd1 inhibited the generation of trm17like cells.
conclusions cd4 trm17 cells are the predominant source of il17a in spa.
the tcr stimulation is essential for the secretion of il17a by trm17like cells.
the epigenetic regulator brd1 contributes to the generation of trm17.
depleting trm17 cells in spa is a therapeutic strategy with potential to induce longterm remission."
" household residents in malaria endemic areas are at high risk of multiple malaria episodes per year.
this study investigated the annual household malaria episodes ahmes in three health districts in cameroon."
"in biology messenger rna mrna plays a crucial role in gene expression and protein synthesis.
accurate predictive modeling of mrna properties can greatly enhance our understanding and manipulation of biological processes leading to advancements in medical and biotechnological applications.
utilizing biolanguage foundation models allows for leveraging largescale pretrained knowledge which can significantly improve the efficiency and accuracy of these predictions.
however mrna specific foundation models are notably limited posing challenges for efficient predictive modeling in mrnafocused tasks.
in contrast dna and protein modalities have numerous generalpurpose foundation models trained on billions of sequences.
this paper explores the potential for adaptation of existing dna and protein biolanguage models for mrnafocused tasks.
through experiments using various mrna datasets curated from both public domain and internal proprietary database we demonstrate that pretrained dna and protein models can be effectively transferred for mrnafocused tasks using various adaptation techniques such as probing fullrank and lowrank finetuning.
in addition we identify key factors that influence successful adaptation offering guidelines on when generalpurpose dna and protein models are likely to perform well for mrnafocused tasks.
we further assess the impact of model size on adaptation efficacy finding that mediumscale models often outperform larger ones for crossmodal knowledge transfer.
we conclude that by leveraging the interconnectedness of dna mrna and proteins as outlined by the central dogma of molecular biology the knowledge in foundation models can be effectively transferred across modalities significantly enhancing the repertoire of computational tools available for mrna analysis."
"the ribosomeassociated uality ontrol rqc pathway resolves stalled ribosomes.
as part of rqc stalled nascent polypeptide chains ncs are appended with rboxyerminal amino acids cat tails in an mrnafree noncanonical elongation process.
cat tail composition includes ala thr and potentially other residues.
the relationship between cat tail composition and function has remained unknown.
using biochemical approaches in yeast we discovered that mechanochemical forces on the nc regulate cat tailing.
we propose cat tailing initially operates in an “extrusion mode” that increases nc lysine accessibility for onribosome ubiquitination.
thr in cat tails enhances nc extrusion by preventing formation of polyalanine which can form αhelices that lower extrusion efficiency and disrupt termination of cat tailing.
after nc ubiquitylation pulling forces on the nc switch cat tailing to an alaonly “release mode” which facilitates nascent chain release from large ribosomal subunits and nc degradation.
failure to switch from extrusion to release mode leads to accumulation of ncs on large ribosomal subunits and proteotoxic aggregation of thrrich cat tails."
clinicaltrials.gov transcranial alternating current stimulation in back pain pilot study
"over 88 of biological research articles use bar graphs of which 29 have undocumented data distortion mistakes that over or understate findings.
we developed a framework to quantify data distortion and analyzed bar graphs published across 3387 articles in 15 journals finding consistent data distortions across journals and common biological data types.
to reduce bar graphinduced data distortion we propose recommendations to improve data visualization literacy and guidelines for effective data visualization."
"competing interests jb is an elsevier employee.
elsevier runs scopus which is the source of these data and also runs the repository where the database of highlycited scientists is now stored."
"c. elegans molting offers a powerful entry point to understanding developmentally programmed apical extracellular matrix remodeling.
however the gene regulatory network controlling this process remains poorly understood.
focusing on targets of nhr23 a key transcription factor that drives molting we confirmed the kunitz family protease inhibitor gene mlt11 as an nhr23 target.
through reporter assays we identified nhr23binding sites that are necessary and sufficient for epithelial expression.
we generated a translational fusion and demonstrated that mlt11 is localized to the cuticle and lined openings to the exterior vulva rectum mouth.
we created a set of strains expressing varied levels of mlt11 by deleting endogenous cisregulatory element sequences.
combined deletion of two cisregulatory elements caused developmental delay motility defects and failure of the cuticle barrier.
inactivation of mlt11 by rnai produced even more pronounced defects.
mlt11 is necessary to pattern every layer of the adult cuticle suggesting a broad patterning role prior to the formation of the mature cuticle.
together these studies provide an entry point into understanding how individual cisregulatory elements function to coordinate expression of oscillating genes involved in molting and how mlt11 ensures proper cuticle assembly."
"in ecology understanding and quantifying the species turnover rates among different locations is essential for a more concise and predictive science.
however little is known about how the turnover occurs among environmentally similar locations and how it may be related to habitat integrity.
using the communities of ephemoptera plecoptera and trichoptera sampled from streams in the brazilian cerrado we tested the following hypotheses a genus turnover between similar streams will higher in more preserved streams b the relationship between proportional genus turnover and the environment is influenced by the taxonomic group.
we estimated parameters related to the number of potentials observed and alternation of these genera across a habitat integrity gradient in 101 observed streams using a model with bayesian inference.
genera turnover among environmentally similar sites was directly related to the environmental integrity of the stream.
only the genera plecoptera showed a pattern similar to the hypothesis we elaborated showing an increased turnover among wellpreserved streams.
for the other orders the turnover presented two peaks in the environmental gradient one in impacted sites and the other in preserved ones."
"the field of human genetics has reached a consensus that it is important to work with diverse and globally representative participant groups.
this diverse sampling is required to build a robust understanding of the genomic basis of complex traits and diseases as well as human evolution and to ensure that all people benefit from downstream scientific discoveries.
while previous work has characterized compositional biases and disparities for public genomewide association gwas microbiome and epigenomic studies we currently lack a comprehensive understanding of the degree of bias for transcriptomic studies.
to address this gap we analyzed the metadata for rnaseq studies from two public databases—the sequence read archive sra representing 795071 samples from 21209 studies and the database of genotypes and phenotypes dbgap representing 167389 samples from 649 studies.
we also randomly selected 620 studies from sra for detailed manual evaluation.
we found that 3 of samples in sra and 21 of individuals described in the literature had population descriptors race ethnicity or ancestry 28 of samples in dbgap had paired genotype data that was used to empirically infer ancestry.
in sra dbgap and the literature race ethnicity and ancestry terms were frequently conflated and difficult to disambiguate.
after standardizing population descriptors we observed many clear biases for example among samples in sra that were coded using us census terms 69.0 came from white donors corresponding to an 1.2x overrepresentation of this group relative to the us population.
among samples in sra coded using continental ancestry labels 55.6 came from european ancestry donors—an 4.1x overrepresentation of this group relative to the global population.
these biases were generally similar across datasets sra dbgap literature review and were comparable to previous reports for other ‘omics data types.
however we note that relative to other ‘omics data subsets like gwas there is considerably less information of arguably worse quality about who is participating in rnaseq studies.
together these results demonstrate a critical need to improve our thoughtfulness consistency and effort around reporting population descriptors in rnaseq studies and to more generally strive for greater diversity in this important data type."
"pepitem is an immunemodulatory peptide that effectively regulates inflammation and mitigates immunemediated inflammatory diseases imids.
here we identify two independently active tripeptide pharmacophores within pepitem and engineered peptidomimetics with enhanced pharmacodynamic properties.
these peptidomimetics regulate tcell trafficking in vitro and reduce tcell neutrophil and macrophage numbers in the inflamed peritoneal cavity in vivo.
in a plaque psoriasis model topical administration reduced disease severity inflammation and immune cell infiltration while regulating cytokine release in macrophages and fibroblasts as well as keratinocyte proliferation.
th1 and th17 cell abundance along with their cytokines was reduced in secondary lymphoid organs.
this expanded functional repertoire of pepitem and its derivatives provides innovative tools for countering immune and stromal cellinduced pathology in imids paving the way for a novel class of antiinflammatory agents."
"climate change poses significant challenges to agriculture and food security particularly through its effects on insect vector populations and the pathogens they transmit.
aphids are one of the biggest group of ectotherms that transmit viruses to plants more than 200 species have been identified as pathogen vectors.
these aphids are responsible for transmitting over 300 viruses.
the lifehistory traits of aphids such as fecundity and survival respond strongly and nonlinearly to temperature and therefore to global warming.
in this study we elaborate the thermal responses for the main lifehistory traits i.e development and mortality rate for aphid species for which data were available or generated.
also thermal responses for virus transmission rates were elaborated to describe plant host to vector and vector to plant host dynamics.
with these data we elaborated thermal suitability models which were used to map current and projected scenarios for the transmission of viruses by aphids.
data was only availablegenerated for 19 aphid species many of which only have data either at the lower or upper thermal limits.
for virus transmission rates from host plant to vector and from vector to plant data was only availablegenerated for potato virus y pvy potato virus a pva and potato leaf roll virus plrv transmitted by the aphid .
projections show that virus transmission by aphids will shift to northern latitudes.
understanding the thermal biology of aphids is crucial for developing effective measures to safeguard agriculture especially staple crops and food security in the context of climate change."
"functional magnetic resonance imaging fmri is a pivotal tool for mapping neuronal activity in the brain.
traditionally the observed hemodynamic changes are assumed to reflect the activity of the most common neuronal type excitatory neurons.
in contrast recent experiments using optogenetic techniques suggest that the fmrisignal instead reflects the activity of inhibitory interneurons.
however these data paint a complex picture with numerous regulatory interactions and where the different experiments display many qualitative differences.
it is therefore not trivial how to quantify the relative contributions of the different cell types and to combine all observations into a unified theory.
to address this we present a new modeldriven metaanalysis which provides a unified and quantitative explanation for all data.
this modeldriven analysis allows for quantification of the relative contribution of different cell types the contribution to the boldsignal from the excitatory cells is 20  and 5080  comes from the interneurons.
our analysis also provides a mechanistic explanation for the observed experimenttoexperiment differences e.g.
a biphasic vascular response dependent on different stimulation intensities and an emerging secondary poststimulation peak during longer stimulations.
in summary our study provides a new emerging consensusview supporting the larger role of interneurons in fmri."
"the golgi apparatus plays a crucial role in the delivery of lysosomal enzymes.
golgi reassembly stacking proteins grasp55 and grasp65 are vital for maintaining golgi structure and function.
grasp55 depletion results in the missorting and secretion of the lysosomal enzyme cathepsin d xiang et al.
2013 though the mechanisms remain unclear.
in this study we conducted secretomic analyses of grasp55 knockout ko cells and found a significant increase in lysosomeassociated proteins in the extracellular medium.
using the lysosomal betahexosaminidase subunit alpha hexa as a model we found that grasp55 depletion disrupted normal trafficking and processing of hexa resulting in increased secretion of the immature proform hexa into the extracellular milieu along with decreased levels of the mature form and enzymatic activity within the cell.
grasp55 depletion significantly reduced the complex formation between hexa and mannose6phosphate m6p receptors mpr despite no overall change in mpr expression.
and finally we found there was a notable reduction in the expression of gnptab leading to a reduction in m6p modification of hexa hindering its efficient targeting to lysosomes.
these findings reveal the role of grasp55 in regulating lysosomal enzyme dynamics emphasizing its role in the sorting and trafficking of lysosomal proteins."
"in the canonical genetic code many amino acids are assigned more than one codon.
work by us and others has shown that the choice of these synonymous codon is not random and carries regulatory and functional consequences.
existing protein foundation models ignore this contextdependent role of coding sequence in shaping the protein landscape of the cell.
to address this gap we introduce cdsfm a suite of codonresolution large language models including both encodon and decodon models with up to 1b parameters.
pretrained on 60 million proteincoding sequences from more than 5000 species our models effectively learn the relationship between codons and amino acids recapitualing the overall structure of the genetic code.
in addition to outperforming stateoftheart genomic foundation models in a variety of zeroshot and fewshot learning tasks the larger pretrained models were superior in predicting the choice of synonymous codons.
to systematically assess the impact of synonymous codon choices on protein expression and our models’ ability to capture these effects we generated a large dataset measuring overall and surface expression levels of three proteins as a function of changes in their synonymous codons.
we showed that our encodon models could be readily finetuned to predict the contextual consequences of synonymous codon choices.
armed with this knowledge we applied encodon to existing clinical datasets of synonymous variants and we identified a large number of synonymous codons that are likely pathogenic several of which we experimentally confirmed in a cellbased model.
together our findings establish the cdsfm suite as a powerful tool for decoding the complex functional grammar underlying the choice of synonymous codons."
the ribosomeassociated
"the bamenda santa and tiko health districts are in the highest malaria transmission strata of cameroon.
the purpose of this study was to explore the indicators of ownership and utilisation as well as maintenance of longlasting insecticidal nets llins in three health districts in cameroon.
a crosssectional household survey involving 1251 households was conducted in the bamenda santa and tiko health districts in cameroon.
a structured questionnaire was used to collect data on llins ownership utilisation and maintenance as well as demographic characteristics.
the average number of llins per household was higher in the bamenda health district bhd compared to the tiko health district thd 2.5±1.4 vs 2.4±1.6 as well as the household ownership of at least one llin 93.3 vs. 88.9. the proportion of the"
"embryonic stem cell research has uncovered different requirements for wntβcatenin signalling in human naïve pluripotent cells compared to the mouse paradigm.
it is therefore important to study wntβcatenin signalling directly in models of early human development.
since tcflef factors mediate the regulation of target genes downstream of wntβcatenin signalling we studied the expression and protein localisation of the four tcflef genes by analysing"
"presenilin proteins the catalytic components of the γsecretase enzyme play a key role in the pathogenesis of alzheimers disease primarily by generating amyloidβ peptides.
although often grouped together presenilin1 ps1 and presenilin2 ps2 are distinct proteins that contribute differently to γsecretase activity.
this study examines the differential expression of ps1 and ps2 in various neuroblastoma and microglial cell lines along with compensatory responses following the ablation of one presenilin homologue.
using quantitative immunoblotting we show that ps1 and ps2 expression levels vary significantly across cell types.
notably the ablation of ps2 results in increased ps1 expression particularly in microglial cells highlighting the importance of ps2.
additionally neuronal differentiation of two neuroblastoma lines caused changes in protein expression levels resulting in similar expression profiles of ps1 and ps2 with ps2 levels being higher than ps1.
understanding ps expression profiles is crucial for distinguishing between ps1 and ps2mediated γsecretase activity and for developing γsecretasetargeted therapeutics with improved selectivity."
"ultrasound imaging holds significant promise for the observation of molecular and cellular phenomena through the utilization of acoustic contrast agents and acoustic reporter genes.
optimizing imaging methodologies for enhanced detection represents an imperative advancement in this field.
most advanced techniques relying on amplitude modulation scheme such as cross amplitude modulation xam and ultrafast amplitude modulation uam combined with hadamard encoded multiplane wave transmissions have shown efficacy in capturing acoustic signals of gas vesicles gvs.
nonetheless uam sequence requires odd or evenelement transmissions leading to imprecise amplitude modulation emitting scheme and the complex multiplane wave transmission scheme inherently yields overlong pulse durations.
xam sequence is limited in terms of field of view and imaging depth.
to overcome these limitations we introduce an innovative ultrafast imaging sequence called nonlinear singular value decomposition svd beamforming.
our method demonstrated a contrast imaging sensitivity comparable to the current goldstandard xam and uam while requiring 4.8 times less pulse transmissions.
with similar number of transmit pulses nonlinear svd beamforming outperforms xam and uam in terms of an improvement in signaltobackground ratio of  4.78 db and  8.29 db respectively.
additionally our method provides a higher flexibility in terms of the selection of acoustic pressure amplitude compared to the other methods.
furthermore it shows a significant potential for application in the realm of ultrasound localization microscopy ulm where it stands poised to facilitate the more precise extraction of nonlinear signatures originating from contrast agents."
"autocatalysis is seen as a potential key player in the origin of life and perhaps more generally in the emergence of darwinian dynamics.
building on recent formalizations of this phenomenon we tackle the computational challenge of exhaustively detecting autocatalytic cycles in reactions networks and further evaluate the impact of thermodynamic constraints on their realization under mass action kinetics.
we first characterize the complexity of the detection problem by proving its npcompleteness.
this justifies the use of constraint solvers to list all autocatalytic cycles in a given reaction network and also to group them into compatible sets composed of cycles whose stoichiometric requirements are not contradictory.
crucially we show that the introduction of thermodynamic realism does constrain the composition of these sets.
compatibility relationships among cycles can indeed be disrupted when the reaction kinetics obey thermodynamic consistency throughout the network.
on the contrary these constraints have no impact on the realizability of isolated cycles unless upper or lower bounds are imposed on the concentrations of the reactants.
overall by better characterizing the conditions of autocatalysis in complex reaction systems this work brings us a step closer to assessing the contribution of this collective chemical behavior to the emergence of natural selection in the primordial soup."
"the activation of gene circuits can impose a significant burden on cells leading to heterogeneous expression and reduced productivity.
in this work we focused on the t7 production system in"
developmental genes are controlled by an ensemble of
"dna extraction technology continues to evolve along with the need for a fast and simple process.
the dna extraction with magnetic nanoparticles accommodates these demands by providing a method that is safe simple and yet able to give good purity.
the purity parameter of the extracted dna is based on the a260280 value.
this metaanalysis aims to find variables that can affect the purity of extracted dna using magnetic nanoparticles based on its extraction and particle synthesis procedure.
the information to be analyzed is from dna extraction from human blood plasmid extraction and e. coli gdna extraction.
the research begins with a systematic review to collect appropriate studies and analysis will be carried out using minitab to find variables that affect the purity of dna either positive or negative.
here we show that no variables have been found significant to the purity of the extracted dna in both the dna extraction procedure steps and reagents.
for the magnetic nanoparticle synthesis method for extraction of  gdna coating agent teostio coznfeo magnetic nanoparticles and the interaction between coznfeo and teos are found to be variables that influence the purity of the extracted dna based on a260280.
hopefully this information can be used as a development idea either for the magnetic nanoparticle synthesis procedure or the selection of reagents and dna extraction procedures.
in addition the results of this analysis can also be used for consideration in an inhouse magnetic nanoparticlebased dna extraction assembly."
"lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths comprising nearly 25 of all cancer deaths 1. the fiveyear survival rate of patients with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma nsclc remains significantly low given that over half present with locally advanced or metastatic disease at time of diagnosis and experience tumor recurrence following therapeutic intervention 23. current evaluation techniques to assess treatment response are lacking given they are implemented several weeks after treatment completion and are solely based on anatomical changes in tumor size forgoing other criteria such as functional or metabolic changes.
there is a critical need to identify surrogate markers early on following diagnosis that aid in distinguishing patients based on their longterm outcome.
two photon microscopy tpm techniques provide noninvasive highresolution information on cell metabolism within tissue by utilizing an optical redox ratio orr of fadnadhfad autofluorescence.
the goal of this study is to use the orr and nadh fluorescence lifetime decay to identify measurable differences in optical endpoints of human nsclc that are indicative of their longterm outcome.
twentynine treatmentnaive nsclc specimens were classified into metastatic and nonmetastatic groups according to subjectdetail reports.
the orr and mean nadh lifetime were determined for each sample revealing a significant increase in the orr for the metastatic group.
given that keap1 expression has previously been associated with poor patient outcomes we stained our samples for keap1 and found low keap1 expression regions to be associated with higher orr.
a deep learning network base on inceptionresnetv2 trained on imaging endpoints auc  0.68 outperformed a model built with only clinicopathologic features auc  0.45 when classifying tumors based on their metastatic status.
these results demonstrate the feasibility of using optical imaging of autofluorescence of metabolic cofactors to identify differences indicative of longterm patient outcome."
" functional electrical stimulation fes is used for decades in rehabilitation centers.
for patients with a spinal cord injury sci fes can prevent muscular atrophy reduce spasticity andor restore limb movements.
to this last aim fes external devices can be used but elicit imprecise movements.
fes implanted devices used neuromuscular stimulation and required implantation of one electrode for each site muscle to stimulate an heavy surgical procedure and 10 times more electrical charges than nerve stimulation.
moreover complications related to the numerous implanted components could appear over time.
the purpose of this work is to evaluate whether a multicontact nerve cuff electrode can selectively activate forearm and hand muscles and restore functional movements in patient with a complete tetraplegia."
"tripartite motif trim family proteins have diverse roles across a broad variety of cellular functions which are largely presumed to depend on their ubiquitin e3 ligase activity conferred by a ring domain.
however recent reports have shown that some trims lack detectable ubiquitination activity in isolation despite containing a ring domain.
here we present parallel in cellulo in vitro and in silico structurefunction analyses of the ubiquitin e3 ligase activity and ring domain structural characteristics of whole trim protein family.
indepth followup studies of this comprehensive dataset reveals a number of pseudoligases whose ring domains have structurally diverged at either the homodimerisation or e2ubiquitin interfaces thereby disrupting their ability to catalyse ubiquitin transfer.
together these data raise intriguing open questions regarding the unknown trim functions in physiology and disease."
"over the past decade pathogen genome sequencing has become well established as a powerful approach to study infectious disease epidemiology.
in particular when multiple genomes are available from several geographical locations comparing them is informative about the relative size of the local pathogen populations as well as past migration rates and events between locations.
the structured coalescent model has a long history of being used as the underlying process for such phylogeographic analysis.
however the computational cost of using this model does not scale well to the large number of genomes frequently analysed in pathogen genomic epidemiology studies.
several approximations of the structured coalescent model have been proposed but their effects are difficult to predict.
here we show how the exact structured coalescent model can be used to analyse a precomputed dated phylogeny in order to perform bayesian inference on the past migration history the effective population sizes in each location and the directed migration rates from any location to another.
we describe an efficient reversible jump markov chain monte carlo scheme which is implemented in a new r package.
we use simulations to demonstrate the scalability and correctness of our method and to compare it with existing comparable software.
we also applied our new method to several stateoftheart  datasets on the population structure of real pathogens to showcase the relevance of our method to current data scales and research questions."
"chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen with a unique developmental cycle.
it differentiates between two functional and morphological forms elementary body eb and reticulate body rb.
the signals that trigger differentiation from one form to the other are unknown.
ebs and rbs have distinctive characteristics that distinguish them including their size infectivity proteome and transcriptome.
intriguingly they also differ in their overall redox status as ebs are oxidized and rbs are reduced.
we hypothesize that alterations in redox may serve as a trigger for secondary differentiation.
to test this we examined the function of the primary antioxidant enzyme alkyl hydroperoxide reductase subunit c ahpc a wellknown member of the peroxiredoxins family in chlamydial growth and development.
based on our hypothesis we predicted that altering the expression of ahpc would modulate chlamydial redox status and trigger earlier or delayed secondary differentiation.
to test this we created ahpc overexpression and knockdown strains.
during ahpc knockdown ros levels were elevated and the bacteria were sensitive to a broad set of peroxide stresses.
interestingly we observed increased expression of ebassociated genes and concurrent higher production of ebs at an earlier time in the developmental cycle indicating earlier secondary differentiation occurs under elevated oxidation conditions.
in contrast overexpression of ahpc created a resistant phenotype against oxidizing agents and delayed secondary differentiation.
together these results indicate that redox potential is a critical factor in developmental cycle progression.
for the first time our study provides a mechanism of chlamydial secondary differentiation dependent on redox status."
"the structure of compound eyes in arthropods has been the subject of many studies revealing important biological principles.
however until recently these studies were constrained by the twodimensional nature of available ultrastructural data.
here by taking advantage of the novel threedimensional ultrastructural dataset obtained using volume electron microscopy vem we present the first cellularlevel reconstruction of the whole compound eye of an insect the extremely miniaturized parasitoid wasp .
the compound eye of the female  consists of 29 ommatidia and contains 478 cells.
despite the almost anucleate brain all cells of the compound eye possess nuclei.
like in larger insects the dorsal rim area dra of the"
"computerized cognitive training programs are becoming increasingly popular and practical for cognitive aging.
nevertheless basic questions remain about the benefits of such programs and about the degree to which participant expectations might influence training and transfer.
here we examined a commercial cognitive training program"
"the golgi apparatus plays a crucial role in the delivery of lysosomal enzymes.
golgi reassembly stacking proteins grasp55 and grasp65 are vital for maintaining golgi structure and function.
grasp55 depletion results in the missorting and secretion of the lysosomal enzyme cathepsin d xiang et al.
2013 though the mechanisms remain unclear.
in this study we conducted secretomic analyses of grasp55 knockout ko cells and found a significant increase in lysosomeassociated proteins in the extracellular medium.
using the lysosomal betahexosaminidase subunit alpha hexa as a model we found that grasp55 depletion disrupted normal trafficking and processing of hexa resulting in increased secretion of the immature proform hexa into the extracellular milieu along with decreased levels of the mature form and enzymatic activity within the cell.
grasp55 depletion significantly reduced the complex formation between hexa and mannose6phosphate m6p receptors mpr despite no overall change in mpr expression.
and finally we found there was a notable reduction in the expression of gnptab leading to a reduction in m6p modification of hexa hindering its efficient targeting to lysosomes.
these findings reveal the role of grasp55 in regulating lysosomal enzyme dynamics emphasizing its role in the sorting and trafficking of lysosomal proteins."
" pediatric pulmonary vein stenosis pvs is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality for the subset of patients with recurrent or progressive disease.
the molecular mechanisms underlying the development and trajectory of pvs remain unclear.
this study characterizes the transcriptome of clinical and phenotypic subtypes of pvs."
"plant communities are dynamic cyclical directional and stochastic changes in species composition make interpretation of responses complex.
the multidimensionality of ecological change is reduced by ecosystem indicators that quantify functional responses to environmental drivers.
however thresholds of detectable change in indicators may vary by ecosystem or the spatial configuration of monitoring sites within regions.
we quantified the power of a continental terrestrial ecosystem plot network tern ausplots australia to detect change in ecological indicators linked to disturbance and climate community temperature index cti proportional abundance of photosynthetic pathways c4 and species abundance distribution sad.
we simulated trend and noise scenarios and calculated power and effect size across spatial clusters of plots using linear mixed effects models.
we then assessed factors that influenced change detection capacity.
power varied substantially across the network.
trends with a minimum magnitude of 0.53.0 degrees celsius in cti 0.010.3 in c4 and 0.10.5 in the sad sigma were detectable depending on cluster identity and noise.
increased plot replication within a spatial cluster increased power and lower variance among baseline replicates increased effect size for cti and c4 but not sad.
latitudinal patterns in change detection capacity emerged for cti and c4.
the effect size of increasing cti was greater in the tropics due to lower amongplot variance while power to detect increasing c4 was higher in the temperate south where c4 is rare.
indicators reveal trends in complex ecological data that can inform decisionmaking.
increasing spatial replication and minimising spatial variation by stratifying plots to the same ecological community enhance change detection albeit with different effectiveness by indicator.
the results suggest change detection differs by location irrespective of sampling factors such as number of plots.
strategies and thresholds for change detection may therefore apply unequally across environments and should be considered by region and response parameter."
"torsades de pointes is a potentially lethal ventricular arrhythmia that may be caused by many classes of drugs.
the likelihood of arrhythmia depends upon the particular combination of cardiac ionchannels that the drug targets.
the risk for a given drug can be measured against the axis of arrhythmia which is a conceptual line in the parameter space of ventricular cardiomyocyte electrophysiology.
the axis describes the most potent combination of ionchannel blocks that is theoretically possible.
it thus serves as a convenient yardstick for quantifying the proarrhythmic risk of novel drugs from their channelblocking profiles.
to date the axis of arrhythmia has only been derived from biophysical computer simulations.
here we derive the axis directly from the response profiles of selected ionchannels to known drugs n109.
the new method provides an independent line of evidence for estimating the axis of arrhythmia.
using stepwise reduction the two methods were found to converge to identical estimates of the axis in two ioncurrents  and .
the resulting axis predicted the proarrhythmic risk of the test drugs with 89.9 to 91.7 accuracy depending on the dose at which the drug was assessed.
the axis of arrhythmia offers a practical method for predicting the proarrhythmic risk of novel drugs without the need for drugspecific computer simulations.
it is the only metric of proarrhythmic risk that has been derived from both a biophysical model and a purely statistical model.
it thus combines the benefits of biophysical interpretation and computational efficiency in assessing the torsadogenic risk of new drugs prior to clinical trials."
"creating increasingly sensitive and costeffective nucleic acid detection methods is critical for enhancing pointofcare poc applications.
this involves capturing all desired biomarkers in a sample with high specificity and transducing the capture events to a detector.
however the signal from biomarkers present at extremely low amounts often falls below the detection limit of typical fluorescencebased methods making molecular amplification a necessary step.
here we present a nucleic acid detection assay of a 151nucleotide sequence specific to antibioticsresistant klebsiella pneumoniae based on singlemolecule fluorescence detection of nonamplified dna down to the attomolar level using trident nanoantennas with cleared hotspots nachos.
our nachosdiagnostics assay leverages a compact microscope with a large fieldofview and costefficient components including microfluidic flow to enhance capturing efficiency.
fluorescence enhancement is provided by dna origami nanoantennas arranged in a dense array using a combination of nanosphere lithography and sitespecific dna origami placement.
our method can detect 200 ± 50 out of 600 molecules in a 100 μl sample volume within an hour.
this represents typical number of pathogens in clinical samples commonly detected by polymerase chain reaction but without the need for molecular amplification.
we achieve similar sensitivity in untreated human blood plasma enhancing the practical applicability of the system.
our platform can be adapted to detect shorter nucleic acid fragments that are not compatible with traditional amplificationbased technologies.
this broadens its potential for diverse diagnostic and healthcare applications providing a robust and scalable solution for sensitive nucleic acid detection in various clinical settings."
"antibodydrug conjugates adcs have emerged as a major modality of targeted cancer therapy yet no adc has been approved for colorectal cancer crc.
lgr456 leucinerich repeat containing g proteincoupled receptor 4 5 6 are three related receptors that are expressed at high levels together or alternately in nearly all cases of crc.
adcs targeting lgr5 have been shown to have robust antitumor potency but not all crc cells express lgr5 and lgr5positive tumor cells may lose lgr5 expression due to cancer cell plasticity.
rspondin 4 rspo4 is a natural protein ligand of lgr456 with high affinity for all three receptors.
we fused a mutant form of rspo4 that retains high affinity binding to lgr456 to igg1 fc to create a peptibody designated r462.
conjugation of r462 with a camptothecin analog cpt2 at eight drugs per peptibody led to the synthesis of r462cpt2 that showed highly potent cytotoxic activity in vitro in crc cell lines expressing any of lg456.
in cell line xenograft and pdx models of crc r462cpt2 demonstrated robust antitumor effect.
importantly r462cpt2 showed no major adverse effect at therapeutically effective dose levels.
these results strongly support the use of rspo ligand drugconjugates that target lgr456 simultaneously for the treatment of crc."
"the african catfish clarias gariepinus is a commercially important species for both fisheries and aquaculture and is now the most commonly farmed fish in subsaharan africa.
however knowledge about the genetic diversity and population structure of wild and farmed populations which is crucial for effective conservation and sustainable aquaculture management is scarce.
using mitochondrial dna mtdna cytochrome c oxidase 1 gene coi sequencing and genomic analysis using triple restriction siteassociated dna sequencing 3rad we investigated the genetic diversity and population structure of farmed and wild c. gariepinus populations from nigeria including an albino form found in the wild.
eleven coi haplotypes were identified of which seven were unique to wild samples.
wild sampling sites had a slightly broader range and higher maximum values for observed heterozygosity ho  0.109 to 0.165 expected heterozygosity he  0.111 to 0.216 and nucleotide diversity pi  0.125 to 0.225 compared to the farmed populations ho  0.118 to 0.147 he  0.112 to 0.144 pi  0.117 to 0.151. conversely genetic differentiation fst was higher among farmed sampling sites compared to the wild ones and there was high genetic differentiation between the farmed and wild c. gariepinus sampling sites fst  0.31 to 0.47. despite evidence for admixture for both farmed and wild fish there was little evidence of admixture between the two groups.
nevertheless both mtdna and 3rad data strongly suggested that the albino fish collected from the wild were in fact farm escapees.
despite overall differentiation farmed genotypes suggesting that overall genetic integrity of wild fish has been maintained this evidence of escape provides a warning about potential risks of increasing aquaculture activities.
specifically this indicates the need for greater regulation of fish farms to monitor and reduce the risk of escapes."
"ambrosia beetles and their fungal symbionts represent a widespread and diverse insectfungus mutualism.
this study investigates the genomic adaptations associated with the evolution of the ambrosia lifestyle across multiple fungal lineages.
we performed comparative genomic analyses on 70 fungal genomes from four families irpicaceae ceratocystidaceae nectriaceae and ophiostomataceae including 24 ambrosia and 34 nonambrosia lineages.
our phylogenomic analyses reveal multiple independent colonization of insect vectors by the fungi spanning from the midcretaceous 114.6 ma to the early quaternary 1.9 ma.
contrary to expectations for obligate symbionts ambrosia fungi showed no significant genomewide reductions in size gene count or secreted protein repertoire compared to their nonsymbiotic relatives.
instead we observed complex lineagespecific patterns of genomic adaptation.
key findings include lineagespecific expansions in carbohydrateactive enzyme families aa4 in nectriaceae ce4 in ophiostomataceae and gh3 in ophiostomataceae and ceratocystidaceae suggesting potential enhancement or loss of lignin modification hemicellulose deacetylation and cellulose degradation in different ambrosia lineages.
repeatinduced point mutation analysis revealed familyspecific patterns rather than lifestyleassociated differences.
these results highlight the diverse genomic strategies employed by ambrosia fungi demonstrating that symbiont evolution can proceed through refined lineagespecific changes rather than genomewide or convergent alterations.
our study suggests that unlike other insectfarmed fungi ambrosia fungi are not domesticated crops but rather freeliving fungi which coopted wood boring beetles as vectors via subtle lineagespecific adaptations."
"fibroblast activation drives fibrotic diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis.
however the complex interplay of how tissue mechanics and macrophage signals combine to influence fibroblast activation is not well understood.
here we use hyaluronic acid hydrogels as a tunable cell culture system to mimic lung tissue stiffness and viscoelasticity.
we applied this platform to investigate the influence of macrophage signaling on fibroblast activation.
fibroblasts cultured on stiff 50 kpa hydrogels mimicking fibrotic tissue exhibit increased activation as measured by spreading as well as type i collagen and cadherin11 expression compared to fibroblasts cultured on soft 1 kpa viscoelastic hydrogels mimicking normal tissue.
these trends were unchanged in fibroblasts cultured with macrophageconditioned media.
however fibroblasts directly cocultured with m2 macrophages show increased activation even on soft viscoelastic hydrogels that normally suppress activation.
inhibition of interleukin 6 il6 signaling does not change activation in fibroblastonly cultures but ameliorates the profibrotic effects of m2 macrophage coculture.
these results underscore the ability of direct m2 macrophage coculture to override hydrogel viscoelasticity to promote fibroblast activation in an il6dependent manner.
this work also highlights the utility of using hydrogels to deconstruct complex tissue microenvironments to better understand the interplay between microenvironmental mechanical and cellular cues."
"precise transcriptional regulation is critical for cellular function and development yet the mechanism of this process remains poorly understood for many genes.
to gain a deeper understanding of the regulation of neuropsychiatric disease risk genes we identified a total of 39 functional enhancers for four dosagesensitive genes"
""
"aim the changing frequency and intensity of climatic extremes due to climate change can have sudden and adverse impacts on the distribution of species.
while species distribution modelling is a vital tool in ecological applications current approaches fail to fully capture the distribution of climatic extremes particularly of rare events with the most disruptive potential.
especially at the edges of species ranges where conditions are already less favourable predictions might be inaccurate when these extremes are not well represented.
location europe.
taxon tree species.
methods we present a novel approach to integrate extreme events into species distribution models based on the generalised extreme value gev distribution.
this distribution following from the extreme value theory has been established as a valuable tool in analysing climatic extremes both in an ecological context and beyond.
the approach relying on the gev distribution is broadly applicable readily transferable across species and relies on widely available data.
we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach for 28 european tree species illustrating its superior ability to fully capture the distribution of climatic extremes compared to stateoftheart methods.
results we found that incorporating parameters on climatic extremes derived from the gev distribution increased model performance aicmodel and characterized range edges more accurately aucedge compared to competing approaches.
however general auc values were only marginally increased across the species and study period analysed.
overall the gev model predicted a narrower niche for the species included in this study.
main conclusions incorporating climatic extremes can impact spatial predictions of species distribution models especially at range margins.
we found that using the gev distribution to characterise extreme variables in sdms yields the best performance at these distribution edges.
given the importance of range edges for species conservation a detailed inclusion of extremes in sdms employed for those applications will help ensure robust conclusions."
"the need for efficient atp production is predicted to result in the evolution of cooperation between the mitochondrial and nuclear encoded components of the electron transport system.
novel i.e.
mismatched mitonuclear genotype combinations are therefore predicted to result in negative fitness consequences which may become more prevalent with ageing.
such negative fitness effects are expected to be prominent in males since maternal inheritance of mitochondria is predicted to lead to accumulation of maleharming mutations the mothers curse hypothesis.
to test these predictions we measured female and male fertility traits using a genetically diverse panel of 27 mitonuclear populations of drosophila melanogaster with matched or experimentally mismatched mitonuclear genomes at different ages.
we found no overall effect of mitonuclear mismatch.
in females we found no effect of mitonuclear epistasis.
in males we found limited evidence of mitonuclear epistasis affecting fitness in old age however not in the direction predicted.
experimentally mismatched males sired more offspring in one comparison.
sexspecific advantages of mismatched males might arise if novel nuclear alleles compensate for deleterious mitochondrial alleles that have accumulated.
if such compensatory effects of novel mitonuclear combinations increasing fitness occur in nature they could represent a possible counterforce to the mothers curse."
"competing interests jb is an elsevier employee.
elsevier runs scopus which is the source of these data and also runs the repository where the database of highlycited scientists is now stored."
"lignin is a crucial component of the cell wall providing mechanical support and protection against biotic and abiotic stresses.
however little is known about wheat ligninrelated mutants and their roles in pathogen defense.
in this study we identified an ethyl methanesulfonate emsderived"
"population structure provides essential information for developing meaningful conservation plans.
this is especially important in remote places such as oceanic islands where limited population sizes and genetic isolation can make populations more susceptible and selfdependent.
in this study we assess and compare the relatedness population genetics and molecular ecology of two sympatric  species  randall  myers 1983 and  cf.
veron  wallace 1984 around guam using genomewide sequence data ddrad.
we further contrast our findings with the results of a recent study on back reef  cf.
brook 1891 to assess the impact of habitat colony morphology and phylogenetic relatedness on these basic population genetic characteristics and generate testable hypotheses for future studies.
both target species were found to have small effective population sizes low levels of genetic diversity and minimal population structure around guam.
nonetheless  cf.
had significantly higher levels of genetic diversity some population structure as well as more clones close relatives and putative loci under selection.
comparisons with  cf.
indicate a potentially significant impact by habitat on population structure and genetic diversity while colony morphology seems to significantly impact clonality.
this study revealed significant differences in the basic population genetic makeup of two sympatric"
"salmonella typhimurium stm is a globally prevalent pathogen.
we compiled a dataset comprising 65000 publicly available stm isolates and analysed the predictedresistance to 15 key antibiotics.
additionally we typed all isolates using a standardized typing method multilevel genome typing mgt and characterised the resistance profiles by mgt sequence types st. we identified 407 mgt sts wherein at least 80 of the isolates were nonsusceptible to at least one antibiotic.
for the key antibiotics prescribed for severe salmonellosis we identified three ciprofloxacin nonsusceptible mgt sts and eight cefotaxime nonsusceptible mgt sts in the last two years of the dataset 20212022. while the ciprofloxacin nonsusceptible mgt sts comprised isolates predominantly from the uk only one cefotaxime nonsusceptible mgt st comprised isolates predominantly from uk and associated with swine with others from usa and associated with cattle and poultry.
integration of amr predictions with mgt strain typing provides sharable standardised and specific identification and tracking of resistant isolates.
this integrated analysis presents a unique approach for the global surveillance of antimicrobial resistance and resistant strains."
"kinship is a major determinant of affiliative and mating behavior in primates.
in field studies identifying kin typically relies in part on genetic analysis especially for discriminating paternal relationships.
such analyses assume knowledge of mendelian inheritance genotyping technologies and basic statistical inference.
consequently they can be difficult for students to grasp particularly through traditional lecture formats.
here we investigate whether integrating an additional active learning approach—interaction with a shiny web application"
"rnaseq data analysis relies on many different tools each tailored to specific applications and coming with unique assumptions and restrictions.
indeed tools for differential transcript usage or diagnosing patients with rare diseases through splicing and expression outliers either lack in performance discard information or do not scale to massive data compendia.
here we show that replacing the normalisation offsets unlocks bulk rnaseq workflows for scalable differential usage aberrant splicing and expression analyses.
our method saser is much faster than stateoftheart methods dramatically outperforms these to detect aberrant splicing and provides a single workflow for various short and longread rnaseq applications."
"camera traps cts have become cemented as an important tool of wildlife research yet their utility is now extending beyond academics as cts can contribute to more inclusive placebased wildlife management.
from advances in analytics and technology ctbased density estimates of wildlife is an emerging field of research.
most ctbased density methods require an estimate of the size of the viewshed monitored by each ct a parameter that may be highly variable and difficult to quantify.
here we developed and tested a standardized field and analytical method allowing us to predict the probability of photographic capture as it varies within ct viewshed.
we investigated how capture probability changes due to environmental influences i.e.
vegetation structure ambient temperature speed of subject time of day in addition to internal factors from cts themselves i.e.
sensitivity settings number of photos taken and ct brand.
we then summarize these spatial capture probability kernels into a realised viewshed size rvsthe captureprobability corrected size of a cts viewshed.
we found that rvs values are heavily influenced by locationspecific environmental factors i.e.
vegetation structure technological delays associated with cts themselves i.e.
refractory period and internal ct settings i.e.
sensitivity number of photographs taken.
we also found that the rvs values computed using our methodology are substantially smaller than reported values in the literature.
imprecision surrounding ct viewshed areas can create propagating bias when implementing ctbased density estimators.
our method can change how practitioners consider photographs for use in ct density estimators thus increasing the reliability of ctbased density estimation and contribute to more accessible wildlife management practices."
"the current study aimed to optimize the fasting duration in order to mitigate the detrimental effects of heat stress on broilers raised in hot and humid climatic environments.
a total of 500 broiler docs were assigned to five distinct treatment groups tₒ nonfasted controlled temperature 2426℃ nfct t"
"the mammalian circadian clock is an autoregulatory feedback process that is responsible for homeostasis in mouse livers.
these circadian processes are well understood at the genelevel however not well understood at the isoformlevel.
to investigate circadian oscillations at the isoformlevel we used the nanoporebased r2c2 method to create over 78 million highlyaccurate fulllength cdna reads for 12 rna samples extracted from mouse livers collected at 2 hour intervals.
to generate a circadian mouse liver isoformlevel transcriptome we processed these reads using the mandalorion tool which identified and quantified 58612 isoforms 1806 of which showed circadian oscillations.
we performed detailed analysis on the circadian oscillation of these isoforms their coding sequences and transcription start sites and compiled easytoaccess resources for other researchers.
this study and its results add a new layer of detail to the quantitative analysis of transcriptomes."
"becker muscular dystrophy bmd an x—linked muscular dystrophy is mostly caused by an in—frame deletion of dmd.
bmd severity varies from asymptomatic to severe associated with the genotype of dmd.
however the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
we established bmd mice carrying three representative exon deletions ex45—48 del.
ex45—47 del.
and ex45—49 del.
d45—48 d45—47 and d45—49 with high frequencies and different severities in the human bmd hotspot.
all three bmd mice showed muscle weakness muscle degeneration and fibrosis but these changes appeared at different times for each exon deletion consistent with the severities obtained by the natural history study of bmd.
bmd mice showed site—specific muscle changes unlike mdx mice which showed diffuse muscle changes and we demonstrated selective type iia fiber reduction in bmd mice.
furthermore bmd mice showed sarcolemmal neuronal nitric oxide synthetase nnos reduction and morphological capillary changes around type iia fibers.
these results suggest that capillary changes caused by nnos reduction may be associated with the mechanism of skeletal muscle degeneration and type iia fiber reduction in bmd mice.
bmd mice may be useful in elucidating the pathomechanisms and developing therapeutic strategies for human bmd."
"bird species are known to be the main reservoir of a range of respiratory viruses such as influenza newcastle and coronaviruses.
migratory birds are particularly important for the maintenance and long distance spread of the virus to wild bird and poultry species but eventually to mammal species as well.
antarcticas pristine environment and wildlife is of immense biological value but the spread of such deadly viruses pose a substantial threat to the regions fragile ecosystems.
to investigate the presence of respiratory viruses in the region we sampled feces of different wild migratory birds at various localities in the south shetland islands in the antarctic summer of 2023 and screened them for coronaviruses covs and influenza a virus iav.
viral screening was performed by the conventional pancoronavirus rtpcr protocol covs by quantitative onestep realtime rtpcr iavs followed by metatranscriptomic sequencing of positive samples.
during january and february of 2023 we collected and examined a total of 243 fecal samples representing stercorarius spp n5 larus dominicanus n16 phalacrocorax bransfieldensis n3 pygoscelis adeliae n19 pygoscelis antarcticus n38 pygoscelis papua n139 pygoscelis spp n23.
all tested samples were negative for influenza a and one sample from the colony of l. dominicanus at keller peninsula king george island tested positive for covs.
metatranscriptomic sequencing recovered a full deltacov genome.
nucleotide and amino acid distance analysis revealed that the deltacoronavirus detected belongs to subgenus buldecovirus and to the novel wild bird deltacov clade previously identified infecting antarctica penguins.
the identified deltacov is most closely related to a deltacoronavirus previously identified 2014 in p. papua penguin sampled at isla kopaitik base ohiggin suggesting a potential cross species transmission.
the presence of covs in antarctic migratory seabirds raises concerns about their impact on the wild bird population in antarctica and their potential role in virus dispersion through intra and intercontinental migratory routes.
these findings contribute valuable insights into virus dynamics among seabird populations laying the groundwork for future investigations in this field and warning of the importance of viral surveillance on the antarctic fauna."
"cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and apoptosis underlie cardiomyopathies and heart failure.
while previous studies have described hypertrophy or apoptosis at the level of cell populations how individual cells commit to these distinct yet coregulated fates is unclear.
we developed a highcontent microscopy approach to track singlecell hypertrophy and apoptosis dynamics revealing new features and unique subpopulation responses.
the catecholamine isoproterenol induced both analog hypertrophy and digital apoptosis.
while highdose isoproterenol induced mixed hypertrophy and apoptosis at the population level we found that individual cells that hypertrophy are more likely to survive.
likewise phenylephrineinduced hypertrophy was associated with survival at the singlecell level.
inhibiting caspase3 reduced apoptosis and increased a cell likelihood of hypertrophy.
multinomial loglinear models demonstrate that a cell initial size and dna content predict its susceptibility to hypertrophy or apoptosis.
these data support a growordie conceptual model for cardiomyocyte decisions.
this work develops a singlecell profiling method to reveal that while hypertrophy and apoptosis often coincide at the population level single cells that hypertrophy are protected from death."
"background and aims bowel smooth muscle experiences mechanical stress constantly during normal function and pathologic mechanical stressors in disease states.
we tested the hypothesis that pathologic mechanical stress could alter transcription to induce smooth muscle phenotypic class switching.
methods primary human intestinal smooth muscle cells hismcs seeded on electrospun aligned polyεcaprolactone nanofibrous scaffolds were subjected to pathologic high frequency 1 hz uniaxial 3 cyclic stretch loaded or kept unloaded in culture for 6 hours.
total rna sequencing qrtpcr and quantitative immunohistochemistry defined loadinginduced changes in gene expression.
nichenet predicted how differentially expressed genes might impact hismcs and other bowel cells.
results loading induced differential expression of 4537 genes in hismcs.
loaded hismcs had a less contractile phenotype with increased expression of synthetic smc genes proinflammatory cytokines and altered expression of axon guidance molecules growth factors and morphogens.
many differentially expressed genes encode secreted ligands that could act cellautonomously on smooth muscle and on other cells in the bowel wall.
discussion hismcs demonstrate remarkably rapid phenotypic plasticity in response to mechanical stress that may convert contractile hismcs into proliferative fibroblastlike cells or proinflammatory cells.
these mechanical stressinduced changes in hismc gene expression may be relevant for human bowel disease."
"dataindependent acquisition dia has become a widely used strategy for peptide and protein quantification in mass spectrometrybased proteomics studies.
the integration of ion mobility separation into dia analysis such as the diapasef technology available on brukers timstof platform further improves the quantification accuracy and protein depth achievable using dia.
we introduce diatracer a new spectrumcentric computational tool optimized for diapasef data.
diatracer performs threedimensional mz retention time ion mobility peak tracing and feature detection to generate precursorresolved pseudomsms spectra facilitating direct spectrallibrary free peptide identification and quantification from diapasef data.
diatracer is available as a standalone tool and is fully integrated into the widely used fragpipe computational platform.
we demonstrate the performance of diatracer and fragpipe using diapasef data from triplenegative breast cancer tnbc cerebrospinal fluid csf and plasma samples data from phosphoproteomics and hla immunopeptidomics experiments and lowinput data from a spatial proteomics study.
we also show that diatracer enables unrestricted identification of posttranslational modifications from diapasef data using openmassoffset searches."
"unprecedented climate and land use changes are having major impacts on waterbased ecosystem services es.
it is crucial therefore to get an indepth understanding of current levels of such es provision and how they could be impacted by changed environments or management.
however applying existing models for waterrelated es pose substantial challenges which include the need for indepth specialist hydrological knowledge the requirement for numerous datasets and parameters that may not be consistently available and high computational costs.
additionally there is often a mismatch between the resolution of the model output and parcellevel land management at which es information is often most valuable for supporting decisionmaking."
"pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma pdac a deadly cancer with a 5year survival rate of 12 is characterized by frequently mutated kras early metastasis and extensive desmoplasia.
the latter a formation of dense fibrotic tissue generated by pancreatic stellar cells psc and tumor cells makes up to 80 of the tumor mass and often leads to treatment failure.
to search for novel protein biomarkers for actionable tyrosine kinase drivers of pdac we used a combination of two orthogonal protein analysis methods western blotting wb and mass spectrometry ms. that is we used 1d2d phosphotyrosine ptyr wb in combination with nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry nanolcmsms to analyze homogenates of 6 pdac tumor samples and 5 normal adjacent tissue controls.
surprisingly we found a novel abundant 55 kda ptyrprotein in 26 tumor samples and identified it as mutated ptyrdesmin.
further proteomics analysis of the purified protein cut from multiple coomassiestained 2d gels revealed that the mutant amino acid tyrosine d399y is phosphorylated ptyr.
a possible role for mutant ptyrdesmin in pdac metastasis is discussed along with peptide inhibitor drugs."
"salvia species native to the americas are rich in valuable bioactive furanoclerodanes like the psychoactive salvinorin a found in salvia divinorum which is used in treatment of opioid addiction.
however there is relatively little known about their biosynthesis.
to address this we investigated the biosynthesis of salviarin the simplest furanoclerodane structure in the ornamental sage salvia splendens.
using a selforganizing map and mutual rank analysis of rnaseq coexpression data we identified three cytochrome p450 enzymes responsible for converting kolavenol into salviarin precursors consecutively annonene hardwickiic acid and hautriwaic acid.
as annonene and hardwickiic acid have also been proposed as intermediates in the biosynthesis of salvinorin a and to examine our hypothesis for common evolutionary origin of the furanoclerodane pathway between the two salvia species we searched for homologous genes in available data for s. divinorum.
the enzymes encoded by orthologous genes from s. divinorum displayed kolavenol synthase sdkls annonene synthase sdans and hardwickiic acid synthase sdhdas activity respectively supporting the view that these are intermediate steps in the biosynthesis of salvinorin a. we investigated the origin of annonene synthase and the role of gene duplication in the evolution of this specific activity.
our work shows how s. splendens can serve as a model species for studying furanoclerodanes biosynthesis in salvia species contributes to understanding the evolution of specialized metabolism in plants and provides new tools to produce salvinorin a in biotechnological chassis."
"one of the challenges for experimental structural biology in the 21st century is to see chemical reactions happen.
dna gyrase is a type iia topoisomerase that can create temporary doublestranded dna breaks to regulate dna topology.
drugs such as gepotidacin zoliflodacin and the quinolone moxifloxacin can stabilize these normally transient dnastrand breaks and kill bacteria.
crystal structures of uncleaved dna with a gepotidacin precursor 2.1å gsk2999423 or with doubly cleaved dna and zoliflodacin or with its progenitor qpt1 have been solved in the same p6 spacegroup ab≈93å c≈412å.
this suggests it may be possible to observe the two dnacleavage steps and two dnareligation steps in this p6"
"synthetic metal chelators are widely used in industrial clinical and agricultural settings leading to their accumulation in the environment.
although the effects of chelators on metal solubility and bioavailability are well documented their impact on microbial physiology is not well defined.
we measured the growth of  a common soil and aquatic bacterium in the presence of the ubiquitous chelator ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid edta and found that it restricts growth by reducing intracellular iron levels.
using barcoded transposon sequencing we identified an operonic gene pair  that is required to maintain iron homeostasis during edta challenge.
encodes one of four tonbdependent transporters that are regulated by the ferric uptake repressor fur and stands out among this group of genes in its ability to support  growth across diverse media conditions.
the function of ccit strictly requires  which encodes a cytoplasmic fe dioxygenasefamily protein.
our results thus define a functional partnership between an outer membrane iron receptor and a cytoplasmic dioxygenase that are broadly coconserved in proteobacteria.
we expanded our analysis of the  system to natural environments by measuring the growth of mutant strains in freshwater from two ecologically distinct lakes which have significantly different nutritional and geochemical profiles compared to standard laboratory media.
and  were not required for growth in lake water regardless of edta presence highlighting the iron acquisition versatility of  in  environments and underscoring the conditional toxicity of edta.
this study defines a conserved iron acquisition system and bridges laboratorybased physiology studies to realworld environments."
"recent breakthroughs in protein structure prediction have led to an unprecedented surge in highquality 3d models highlighting the need for efficient computational solutions to manage and analyze this wealth of structural data.
in our work we comprehensively examine the structural clusters obtained from the alphafold protein structure database afdb a highquality subset of esmatlas and the microbiome immunity project mip.
we create a single cohesive lowdimensional representation of the resulting protein space.
our results show that while each database occupies distinct regions within the protein structure space they collectively exhibit significant overlap in their functional profiles.
highlevel biological functions tend to cluster in particular regions revealing a shared functional landscape despite the diverse sources of data.
to facilitate exploration and improve access to our data we developed an openaccess web server.
our findings lay the groundwork for more indepth studies concerning protein sequencestructurefunction relationships where various biological questions can be asked about taxonomic assignments environmental factors or functional specificity."
"a single guide rna sgrna directs cas9 nuclease for genespecific scission of doublestranded dna.
high cas9 activity is essential for efficient gene editing to generate gene deletions and gene replacements by homologous recombination.
however cleavage efficiency is below 50 for more than half of randomly selected sgrna sequences in human cell culture screens or model organisms.
we used in vitro assays to determine intrinsic molecular parameters for maximal sgrna activity including correct folding of sgrnas and cas9 structural information.
from comparison of over 10 data sets we find major constraints in sgrna design originating from defective secondary structure of the sgrna sequence context of the seed region gc context and detrimental motifs but we also find considerable variation among different prediction tools when applied to different data sets.
to aid selection of efficient sgrnas we developed webbased platinumcrispr an sgrna design tool to evaluate basepairing and sequence composition parameters for optimal design of highly efficient sgrnas for cas9 genome editing named platinumcrispr.
we applied this tool to select sgrnas to efficiently generate gene deletions in  and  that bind to  methylated adenosines m"
"during development and tissue repair cells reshape and reconfigure to ensure organs take specific shapes.
this process is inherently threedimensional 3d.
yet in part due to limitations in imaging and data analysis cell shape analysis within tissues have been studied as a twodimensional 2d approximation"
"cd8 t cells are the dominant lymphocyte population in multiple sclerosis ms lesions where they are highly clonally expanded.
the clonal identity function and antigen specificity of cd8 t cells in ms are not well understood.
here we report a comprehensive singlecell rnaseq and t cell receptor tcrseq analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid csf and blood from a cohort of treatmentnaive ms patients and control participants.
a small subset of highly expanded and activated cd8 t cells were enriched in the csf in ms that displayed high activation cytotoxicity and tissuehoming transcriptional profiles.
using a combination of unbiased and targeted antigen discovery approaches msderived cd8 t cell clonotypes recognizing epsteinbarr virus ebv antigens and multiple novel mimotopes were identified.
these findings shed vital insight into the role of cd8 t cells in ms and pave the way towards disease biomarkers and therapeutic targets."
giant hummingbirds
"cell division orientation which is key to cell fate and shaping tissues is influenced by mechanical forces.
for example in uniaxially stretched tissue most divisions orient along the stretch axis.
this mechanosensitive division orientation can be achieved by distinct mechanisms involving a direct response to force or an indirect response to force via cell shape changes.
cells also generally align divisions along their long axis of interphase shape.
since stretching a tissue elongates cells uncoupling whether divisions orient in response to force or to cell shape remains challenging.
here we utilised the xenopus laevis embryonic animal cap tissue to which a reproducible external stretch can be applied to understand mechanosensitive division orientation.
we focused on nuclear mitotic apparatus protein numa which is key to spindle orientation.
we show that numa is dynamically localised to the cell cortex earlier during mitosis in uniaxially stretched tissues.
this temporal cortical recruitment of numa coincides with the onset and subsequent stretchinduced amplification of spindle oscillations.
additionally we show that knockdown of numa reduces spindle oscillations and disrupts division orientation according to stretch and cell shape.
we also show that divisions dynamically align with cell shape under tissue stretch and that this involves a direct response to force via numa localisation rather than an indirect response to force via cell shape changes.
overall using live tissue imaging mathematical modelling and tissue mechanics our results indicate that numa fine tunes spindle dynamics and ensures the accurate alignment of divisions with cell shape and anisotropic tension."
"proteinenergy malnutrition pem is a severe health condition affecting millions especially in developing regions.
this study investigates the potential of moringa oleifera seeds as a lowcost protein source to address protein energy malnutrition.
moringa oleifera seeds were defatted using solvent and used in formulating diets for peminduced wistar rats.
the study analyzed the seeds phytochemical constituents proximate composition amino acid profiles and bioactive compounds through gas chromatographmass spectroscopy gcms.
20 rats were randomly assigned to four groups acontrol b pem c malnourished rats treated with 15 soya bean baseddiet and d malnourished rats  treated with 15 defatted moringa oleifera seedbased diet.
the results show that defatting increased protein content and reduced antinutritional factors like oxalates saponins and tannins enhancing nutrient bioavailability.
defatted moringa oleifera seedbased diets improved liver and kidney functions lipid profiles and protein digestibility in protein energy malnutritioninduced rats.
additionally the seeds contained essential bioactive compounds with potential antioxidant antimicrobial and antiinflammatory properties.
these findings suggest that moringa oleifera seeds could be a promising alternative protein source for combating protein energy malnutrition"
"characterizing the noncoding regions of the genome particularly the cisregulatory elements cres located in accessible chromatin regions acrs in gene promoters is crucial for understanding how gene expression is regulated and how genotype contributes to phenotypic diversity in plants.in this study we used atacseq to resequence and map the acrs of 214 maize inbred lines.
we identified 82174 acrs and reported that 39.55 of them exhibited significant variation across the population.
next we used the accessibility of acrs as a quantitative feature and performed a chromatin associability gwas cagwas resulting in 27004 caqtls.
among them 2463 were predicted to disrupt the cisregulatory elements that tf binds in these acrs suggesting that tf binding affects chromatin accessibility.
specifically we identified two caacrs that regulate the expression of fad7 which encodes a fatty acid desaturase and affects the linolenic acid content.our findings highlight the dynamic nature of maize acrs and demonstrate that chromatin accessibility information could be used for gwass offering key insights into the genetic and regulatory mechanisms of chromatin accessibility and its impact on complex traits in plants."
"amazonia harbors one fourth of the worlds plant diversity and over 300 indigenous groups.
so far however no study has assessed how climate change may simultaneously impact its biological and cultural heritage.
to bridge this gap we assembled a database on 5833 utilized plant species and show that climate change will reduce more the ranges of utilized than of nonutilized species by 2070. locally indigenous cultures may lose an average of 65 of their utilized plant species and 50 of their associated services from climate change.
regionally the loss of threatened languages may result in a 41 reduction in the amazonian knowledge pool.
overall our results point to the strong climate vulnerability of amazonian biocultural heritage."
" in biomedical and health sciences many articles are published open access oa.
rates of oa publications continue to grow including for research carried out by pharmaceutical companies.
to help drive more openness in the pharmaceutical industry we aimed to compare the oa publication rates of pharmaceutical companies with those of academic institutions."
"polygenic risk scores are widely used in disease risk stratification but their accuracy varies across diverse populations.
recent methods largescale leverage multiancestry data to improve accuracy in underrepresented populations but require labelling individuals by ancestry for prediction.
this poses challenges for practical use as clinical practices are typically not based on ancestry.
we propose splendid a novel penalized regression framework for diverse biobankscale data.
our method utilizes ancestry principal component interactions to model genetic ancestry as a continuum within a single prediction model for all ancestries eliminating the need for discrete labels.
in extensive simulations and analyses of 9 traits from the all of us research program n224364 and uk biobank n340140 splendid significantly outperformed existing methods in prediction accuracy and model sparsity.
by directly incorporating continuous genetic ancestry in model training splendid stands as a valuable tool for robust risk prediction across diverse populations and fairer clinical implementation."
"in many terrestrial insects the onset of metamorphosis marks a transition from humid to dry environments.
yet how metamorphosing insect pupae protect themselves against the threat of dehydration remains unclear.
here we identify the chemical composition and biosynthetic origins of a lipid desiccation barrier specific to the pupal and sexuallyimmature adult stages of"
"cotranscriptional rna folding pathways typically involve the sequential formation of folding intermediates.
existing methods for cotranscriptional rna structure probing map the structure of nascent rna in the context of a terminally arrested transcription elongation complex.
consequently the rearrangement of rna structures as nucleotides are added to the transcript can be inferred but is not assessed directly.
to address this limitation we have developed linkedmultipoint transcription elongation complex rna structure probing tecprobelm which assesses the cotranscriptional rearrangement of rna structures by sequentially positioning  rnap at two or more points within a dna template so that nascent rna can be chemically probed.
we validated tecprobelm by measuring known folding events that occur within the  signal recognition particle rna  ztp riboswitch and"
"the chromatins are folded into threedimensional 3d structures inside cells which coordinates the regulation of gene transcription by the noncoding regulatory elements.
aberrant chromatin 3d folding has been shown in many diseases such as acute myeloid leukemia aml and may contribute to tumorigenesis.
the anthracycline topoisomerase ii inhibitors can induce histone eviction and dna damage.
we performed genomewide highresolution mapping of the chemotherapeutic effects of various clinically used anthracycline drugs.
atacseq was used to profile the histone eviction effects of different anthracyclines.
top2a chipseq was used to profile the potential dna damage regions.
integrated analyses show that different anthracyclines have distinct target selectivity on epigenomic regions based on their respective atacseq and chipseq profiles.
we identified the underlying molecular mechanism that unique anthracycline variants selectively target chromatin looping anchors via disrupting ctcf binding suggesting an additional potential therapeutic effect on the 3d genome.
we further performed hic experiments and data from k562 cells treated with the selective anthracycline drugs indicate that the 3d chromatin organization is disrupted.
furthermore aml patients receiving anthracycline drugs showed altered chromatin structures around potential looping anchors which linked to distinct clinical outcomes.
our data indicate that anthracyclines are potent and selective epigenomic targeting drugs and can target the 3d genome for anticancer therapy which could be used for personalized medicine to treat tumors with aberrant 3d chromatin structures."
"bacterial and bacteriophage genomes contain genomic regions of hypervariability diversity hotspots caused by insertions of mobile genetic elements mges nonhomologous recombination events and nonhorizontal hypermutation.
accessory genes encoded in the diversity hotspots are involved in antimge defence and counterdefence virulence and antimicrobial resistance amr thus playing key roles in interactions amongst phages mges bacteria and eukaryotic hosts.
to date the majority of research has been focused on either individual hotspots or on relatively limited sets of hotspots in a small set of genomes typically from a single species.
a global understanding of hotspot diversity and dynamics still lacking.
to address this gap we developed ilund4u an algorithm for the systematic annotation of hotspots across millions of sequences.
using a proteome composition approach ilund4u detects proteome communities annotates accessory proteins and identifies hotspots.
by analysing 873k phage genomes and 696k plasmid sequences we identified 13.7k hotspots and 171k diverse protein families encoded there as cargo.
furthermore ilund4u allows for protein search and proteome annotation functions versus a precomputed ilund4u database.
in the protein search mode ilund4u identifies all hotspots that encode homologues of a query protein.
in the proteome annotation mode ilund4u annotates hotspots by searching for communities of similar proteomes.
detailed documentation user guide and the source code are available at the ilund4u home page artegorov.github.ioilund4u."
"genetic variants associated with autoimmune diseases are highly enriched within putative regulatory regions of cd4 t cells suggesting that they alter disease risk via changes in gene regulation.
however very few genetic variants have been shown to affect t cell gene expression or function.
we tested 18000 autoimmune diseaseassociated variants for allelespecific expression using massively parallel reporter assays in primary human cd4 t cells.
the 545 expressionmodulating variants emvars identified greatly enrich for likely causal variants.
we provide evidence that many emvars are mediated by common upstream regulatory conduits and that putative target genes of primary t cell emvars are highly enriched within a lymphocyte activation network.
using bulk and singlecell crisprinterference screens we confirm that emvarcontaining t cell"
"in the developing mouse ventral spinal cord hes5 a transcription factor downstream of notch signalling is expressed as evenly spaced clusters of high hes5expressing neural progenitor cells along the dorsoventral axis.
while notch signalling requires direct membrane contact for its activation we have previously shown mathematically that contact needs to extend beyond neighbouring cells for the hes5 pattern to emerge.
however the presence of cellular structures that could enable such longdistance signalling was unclear.
here we report that cellular protrusions are present all along the apicobasal axis of individual neural progenitor cells.
through live imaging we show that these protrusions dynamically extend and retract reaching lengths of up to ∼20μm enough to extend membrane contact beyond adjacent cells.
the notch ligand dll1 was found to colocalise with protrusions further supporting the idea that notch signalling can be transduced at a distance.
the effect of protrusions on the hes5 pattern was tested by reducing the density of protrusions using the cdc42 inhibitor ml141 leading to a tendency to decrease the distance between high hes5 cell clusters.
however this tendency was not significant and leaves an open question about their role in the finegrained organisation of neurogenesis."
"molecular biology can be difficult for undergraduate students because course content is often taught using highlyabstract visual representations.
genetic concepts can be depicted with lines letters shapes and symbols and students need to engage their visual literacy skills to appropriately decipher these abstract representations.
we previously found that undergraduate course materials almost always represent chromosomes in abstract forms such as “x” shapes or straight lines with a dot for the centromere.
we hypothesized that students struggle to apply their visual literacy skills to accurately interpret these abstract representations of chromosomes which may be related to the frequentlydocumented incomplete or incorrect ideas students have about chromosome structure and function.
to explore students’ visual literacy related to representations of chromosomes we conducted 35 semistructured interviews with students who had taken at least a year of biology courses.
we asked them to sketch chromosomes interpret an abstract representation of chromosomes and use the abstract representation to answer a question about meiosis.
we found that 97 of participants 34 of 35 held conceptual errors related to chromosome structure and function.
these conceptual errors were often not evident in participants’ verbal definitions of chromosomes and were only revealed in their sketches or explanations of their sketches.
we found that participants frequently misinterpreted xshaped representations of chromosomes mistook unreplicated homologous chromosomes as separated sister chromatids and held misconceptions related to the structure and function of centromeres.
these findings have implications for how chromosomes are taught in biology courses.
we recommend that instructors explicitly discuss the conventions and norms of representing chromosomes as a pathway for increasing students’ visual literacy in molecular biology."
"a major challenge in working with singlecell rna sequencing data is the prevalence of dropout when some transcripts expression values are erroneously not captured.
addressing this issue which produces zeroinflated count data is crucial for many downstream data analyses including the inference of gene regulatory networks grns.
in this paper we introduce two novel contributions.
first we propose dropout augmentation da a simple but effective model regularization method to address the zero inflation problem in singlecell data by augmenting the data with synthetic dropout events.
da offers a new perspective to solve the dropout problem beyond imputation.
second we present dazzle a stabilized and robust version of the autoencoderbased structure equation model for grn inference using the da concept.
benchmark experiments illustrate the improved performance and increased stability of the proposed dazzle model over existing approaches.
the practical application of the dazzle model on a longitudinal mouse microglia dataset containing over 15000 genes illustrates its ability to handle realworld single cell data with minimal gene filtration.
the improved robustness and stability of dazzle make it a practical and valuable addition to the toolkit for grn inference from singlecell data.
finally we propose that dropout augmentation may have wider applications beyond the grninference problem.
project website httpsbcb.cs.tufts.edudazzle."
"wall teichoic acids wtas from the major grampositive foodborne pathogen  are peptidoglycanassociated glycopolymers decorated by monosaccharides that while not essential for bacterial growth are required for bacterial virulence and resistance to antimicrobials.
here we report the structure and function of a bacterial wtas rhamnosyltransferase rmlt strictly required for  wtas rhamnosylation.
in particular we demonstrated that rmlt transfers rhamnose from dtdplrhamnose to naked wtas and that specificity towards tdprhamnose is not determined by its binding affinity.
structures of rmlt with and without its substrates showed that this enzyme is a dimer revealed the residues responsible for interaction with the substrates and that the catalytic residue preorients the acceptor substrate towards the nucleophilic attack to the sugar.
additionally the structures provided indications for two potential interaction pathways for the long wtas on the surface of rmlt.
finally we confirmed that wtas glycosyltransferases are promising targets for nextgeneration strategies against grampositive pathogens by showing that inactivation of the rmlt catalytic activity results in a decreased infection ."
kcnq23 are the predominant voltagegated k
"the ratio of predatortoprey biomass density is not constant along ecological gradients denser ecosystems tend to have fewer predators per prey following a scaling relation known as the predatorprey power law.
the origin of this surprisingly general pattern particularly its connection with environmental factors and predatorprey dynamics is unknown.
here we explore some ways that a sublinear predatorprey scaling could emerge from densitydependent interactions among predators and between predators and prey which we call a topdown origin rather than among prey bottomup origin as proposed in hatton"
"motivation recent advances in sequencing technologies have stressed the critical role of sequence analysis algorithms and tools in genomics and healthcare research.
in particular sequence alignment is a fundamental building block in many sequence analysis pipelines and is frequently a performancecritical bottleneck both in time and memory.
classical sequence alignment algorithms are based on dynamic programming and often require quadratic time and memory with respect to the sequence length.
as a result classic sequence alignment algorithms fail to scale with increasing sequence lengths and quickly become memorybound due to datamovement penalties.
results processinginmemory pim is an emerging architectural paradigm that seeks to accelerate memorybound algorithms by bringing computation closer to the data to mitigate datamovement penalties.
this work presents bimsa bidirectional inmemory sequence alignment a pimoptimized implementation of the stateoftheart sequence alignment algorithm biwfa bidirectional wavefront alignment incorporating hardwareaware optimizations for a productionready pim architecture upmem.
bimsa achieves speedups up to 22.24x 11.95x on average compared to stateoftheart pimenabled implementations of sequence alignment algorithms and supports aligning sequences of thousands of bases exceeding the limitations of current pimaccelerated implementations.
bimsa also achieves speedups up to 5.84x 2.83x on average compared to the most efficient multicore cpu implementation of biwfa.
most notably bimsa exhibits linear scalability with the number of compute units enabling further performance improvements with upcoming pim architectures equipped with more compute units and achieving speedups up to 9.56x 4.7x on average."
"the bond graph approach has been recognised as a useful conceptual basis for understanding the behaviour of living entities modelled as a system with hierarchical interacting parts exchanging energy.
one such behaviour is oscillation which underpins many essential biological functions.
in this paper energybased modelling of biochemical systems using the bond graph approach is combined with classical feedback control theory to give a novel approach to the analysis and potentially synthesis of biochemical oscillators.
it is shown that oscillation is dependent on the interplay between  and  feedback and this interplay is formalised using classical frequencyresponse analysis of feedback systems.
in particular the"
 to explore health literacy levels of primary care patients and associations with demographic variables frequency of visits hospitalization rates and selfperception of health.
high expression of the long noncoding rna lncrna
"the progression of metabolicdysfunctionassociated steatotic liver disease masld to metabolicdysfunctionassociated steatohepatitis mash involves complex alterations in both liverautonomous and systemic metabolism that influence the livers balance of fat accretion and disposal.
here we quantify the relative contribution of hepatic oxidative pathways to liver injury in masldmash.
using nmr spectroscopy uhplcms and gcms we performed stableisotope tracing and formal flux modeling to quantify hepatic oxidative fluxes in humans across the spectrum of masldmash and in mouse models of impaired ketogenesis.
we found in humans with mash that liver injury correlated positively with ketogenesis and total fat oxidation but not with turnover of the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
the use of lossoffunction mouse models demonstrated that disruption of mitochondrial hmgcoa synthase hmgcs2 the ratelimiting step of ketogenesis impairs overall hepatic fat oxidation and induces a masldmashlike phenotype.
furthermore disruption of mitochondrial βhydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase bdh1 the terminal step of ketogenesis also impaired fat oxidation but surprisingly did not exacerbate steatotic liver injury.
taken together these findings suggest that quantifiable variations in overall hepatic fat oxidation may not be a primary determinant of masldtomash progression but rather that maintenance of hepatic ketogenesis could serve a protective role through alternative fat oxidationindependent mechanisms."
"administration of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ssris is associated with a reduced cancer risk and shows significant antitumor effects across multiple tumor types suggesting the potential for repurposing ssris in cancer therapy.
nonetheless the specific molecular target and mechanism of action of ssris remain to be fully elucidated.
here we reveal that citalopram exerts an immunedependent antitumor effects in hepatocellular carcinoma hcc.
interestingly the antihcc effects of citalopram are not reliant on its conventional target the serotonin transporter.
through various drug repurposing approaches including global reverse gene expression profiling drug affinity responsive target stability assay and molecular docking the complement component 5a receptor 1 c5ar1 is identified as a new target of citalopram.
c5ar1 is predominantly expressed by tumorassociated macrophages tams and citalopram treatment enhances local macrophage phagocytosis and elicits cd8 t antitumor immunity.
at a systemic level citalopram treatment results in decreased serum 5ht levels which correlates with increased activation of cd8 t cells.
additionally citalopram promotes αcd3αcd28stimulated cd8 t cell activation expansion and cytotoxicity.
depletion of cd8"
"several countries have either developed or are developing national induced pluripotent stem cell ipsc banks of cell lines derived from donors with hla homozygous genotypes two identical haplotypes prevalent in their local populations to provide immune matched tissues and cells to support regenerative medicine therapies.
this haplobank approach relies on knowledge of the hla genotypes of the population to identify the most beneficial haplotypes for patient coverage and ultimately identify donors or cord blood units carrying two copies of the target haplotype.
a potentially more efficient alternative to a national bank approach is to assess the haplotypes required to provide global patient coverage and to produce a single global haplobank.
toward that end we have developed an algorithm to prioritize hla haplotypes that optimize coverage across the global population.
we analyzed data from eighteen countries participating in the global alliance for ips therapy gait.
a representative pool of hla genotypes reflecting the hla of patients was derived by sampling from each countrys wmda hematopoietic stem cell donor registry or surrogate population.
an algorithm was created based on hlaa b and drb1 haplotype homozygous types with population hla matching coverage defined by the absence of host versus graft hvg mismatches at these loci.
hla matching coverage was determined by iteratively selecting hla haplotypes that provide the largest coverage against patient hla genotypes sampled from the same population excluding genotypes compatible with previous iterations.
the top 10 haplotypes for each of the 18 countries were identified with patient coverage ranging from 19.5 in brazil to 63.8 in japan with a mean coverage of 33.3. in a global model utilizing the 180 most frequent haplotypes across all 18 populations equivalent to 10 lines per country the patient coverage ranged from 54.6 in india to 81.7 in sweden with a mean of 68.4.  our findings demonstrate that global collaboration could more than double the potential for patient hla matching coverage.
interrogation of unrelated hematopoietic stem cell donor registry and cord blood bank hla data demonstrated that hlaa b and drb1 homozygous donors for the top 180 global haplotypes are widely available.
these results show that a globally coordinated strategy for haplobanking would reduce redundancy and allow more patients to be treated with the same investment."
"common stochastic models of gene expression predict the analytical distribution of the mrna level per cell but not at subcellular resolution.
here for a wide class of models of transcription initiation we obtain an exact steadystate solution for the joint distribution of nuclear and cytoplasmic mrna levels per cell.
correcting the solution for extrinsic noise and fitting to single human cell data we precisely quantify the extent of bursty expression in thousands of genes and associate it with their biological functions"
"group 2 innate lymphocytes ilc2s are prevalent in small intestine but engagement of type 2 immunity during basal processes are incompletely described.
thymic stromal lymphopoietin tslp a cytokine implicated in ilc2 activation was constitutively expressed in villus telocytes and cryptassociated trophocytes specialized fibroblasts that sustain epithelial identity.
feeding increased tslp and induced ilc2 type 2 cytokines that were attenuated by deletion of tslp in pdgfra stromal cells or tslp receptor on ilc2s.
mouse and human telocytes expressed receptors for glucagonlike peptide2 glp2 which is released by enteroendocrine cells eecs after eating.
glp2 induced intestinal tslp tslpdependent ilc2 cytokine production and tuft cell hyperplasia.
the telocytealarmin relay couples eec nutrient detection with amplification of a tuft cell chemosensory circuit that diversifies surveillance of ingested cargo."
"the puerto rican crested toad prct is puerto rico’s only endemic toad and has undergone rapid population decline within the last 40 years.
as a hedge against extinction captive assurance colonies have been established at several zoological institutions for breeding and reintroduction.
however reproductive output has remained low despite the use of hormone therapies to attempt to bypass missing abiotic cues and stimulate reproductive behaviors.
this low output necessitates a better understanding of natural fluctuations in gamete specifically sperm quality in captive individuals.
to generate an understanding of natural gametic cycles in captive prcts we administered male prcts n  86 housed under natural temperature and photoperiod cycles with exogenous hormones monthly for one year.
samples were analyzed for motility and concentration to assess variations in sperm quality by month.
spermiation was successfully stimulated every month but quality fluctuated sperm motility was highest in june and july while sperm concentration was highest in december january and march.
these results indicate that while hormones can be utilized to stimulate gamete production in prcts yearround sperm quality is not consistent.
furthermore the seasonal occurrence of peak sperm production of captive males differed from natural peaks reported for wild prcts.
our results illustrate the need for more biologically informed strategies for breeding of atrisk anuran populations."
"following the development of regressionbased methods to estimate natural and sexual selection evolutionary biologists have quantified the strength mode and direction of selection in natural populations.
although this approach has been successful its limitations include lack of replication across species compromising the generality of the inferences beyond microevolutionary time scales.
here we carried out a comparative study of selection on wing shape and body size across multiple populations of two closely related and ecologically similar pond damselflies enallagma cyathigerum and ischnura elegans odonata coenagrionidae.
we found weak stabilizing selection on wing shape in both sexes and no evidence that selection on this trait differed between the species.
in contrast selection on body size was curvilinear in males and directional in females and they differed in form males and intensity females between these two species.
by analyzing selection on the finegrained spatial scale we found that selection on male body size was shaped by the local mating system and the relationship between mating system characteristics and directional selection was remarkably consistent across these species.
finally we present a graphical model that links contemporary selection and macroevolution.
based on this model we conclude that the persistence in ecological modes of life in pond damselflies offers a plausible explanation for why varying selection in nature may still result in a stable adaptive zone lasting millions of years."
"the bamenda santa and tiko health districts are in the highest malaria transmission strata of cameroon.
the purpose of this study was to explore the indicators of ownership and utilisation as well as maintenance of longlasting insecticidal nets llins in three health districts in cameroon.
a crosssectional household survey involving 1251 households was conducted in the bamenda santa and tiko health districts in cameroon.
a structured questionnaire was used to collect data on llins ownership utilisation and maintenance as well as demographic characteristics.
the average number of llins per household was higher in the bamenda health district bhd compared to the tiko health district thd 2.5±1.4 vs 2.4±1.6 as well as the household ownership of at least one llin 93.3 vs. 88.9. the proportion of the  population with universal utilisation was higher in bhd compared to thd 13.1 vs 0.2. in multinomial regression analysis households in the santa health district shd or  0.4 95  c.i 0.2 – 0.8   6.10×10 were less likely to own at least one llin while those in the bhd or  1.3 95  c.i 0.8 – 2.1"
"the bond graph approach has been recognised as a useful conceptual basis for understanding the behaviour of living entities modelled as a system with hierarchical interacting parts exchanging energy.
one such behaviour is oscillation which underpins many essential biological functions.
in this paper energybased modelling of biochemical systems using the bond graph approach is combined with classical feedback control theory to give a novel approach to the analysis and potentially synthesis of biochemical oscillators.
it is shown that oscillation is dependent on the interplay between  and  feedback and this interplay is formalised using classical frequencyresponse analysis of feedback systems.
in particular the  is suggested as a simple scalar indicator of the presence or absence of oscillations it is shown how this indicator can be used to investigate the effect of both the structure and parameters of biochemical system on oscillation.
it follows that the combination of classical feedback control theory and the bond graph approach to systems biology gives a novel analysis and design methodology for biochemical oscillators."
"classical cadherins are ubiquitous calciumdependent adhesive glycoproteins required in junction formation in metazoans.
calcium ions are essential for cadherin biological activity but how they act in synergy is still a matter of controversy.
we investigated by cryoelectron microscopy and cryoelectron tomography a biomimetic system consisting of liposomes decorated with the two first ecadherin extracellular modules previously reported as functionally essential in junction formation.
we showed that ecadherin extracellular modules 1 and 2 are sufficient to form junctions in presence of calcium.
together with the first adhesive contacts we observed the formation of cadherin patches and quasicrystalline structures on the free surface of proteoliposomes suggesting that calcium complexation induces the selfinteraction of the ecadherin extracellular modules 1 and 2 through cis interactions.
we propose that these calciumdependent cadherin nanoplatforms by facilitating the formation frequency of trans interactions most probably favor the formation of junctions.
we also observed a cooperative effect between trans and cis interactions leading to the protein depletion of liposome surfaces.
additionally cryoelectron tomography experiments performed on extracellular ecadherin modules 1 and 2mediated junctions revealed the coexistence of different molecular arrangements previously described from crystallography studies.
thus this study provides a new insight into biophysical mechanisms underlying how calcium binding modulates cadherin adhesive function in showing that ecadherin 1 and 2 modules play a key role through their intrinsic ability to form multiple calciumdependent cis and trans interactions in the formation of cadherin junctions contributing to the dynamics and plasticity of cadherinmediated cell junctions."
"green macroalgae within the order bryopsidales lack the fundamental photoprotective mechanisms of green algae the xanthophyll cycle and energydependent dissipation of excess light.
here by measuring chlorophyll fluorescence at 77k after specific light treatments we show that bryopsidales algae also lack state transitions another ubiquitous photoprotection mechanism present in other green algae.
certain sacoglossa sea slugs can feed on ulvophyceae algae including some bryopsidales and steal chloroplasts kleptoplasts that remain functional inside the animal cells for months without the support of the algal nucleus.
our data reveal that the state transition capacity is not retained in the kleptoplasts of the sea slugs and we provide evidence that the loss is caused by structural changes during their incorporation by the animals.
this enforced chloroplast sphericity was observed in all studied kleptoplastic associations and we propose that it is a fundamental property supporting longterm retention of kleptoplasts in photosynthetic sea slugs."
the authors declare no competing interest.
"the react recovery activity project is an enfsi european network of forensic science institutes supported initiative comprising a large consortium of laboratories.
here the results from more than 23 laboratories are presented.
the primary purpose was to design experiments simulating typical casework circumstances collect data and to implement bayesian networks to assess the value i.e.
likelihood ratio of dna results given activity level propositions.
two different experimental designs were used to simulate a robbery where a screwdriver was used to force a door or window.
propositions and case information were chosen following laboratory feedback listing typical casework circumstances included in the paper.
whereas the proposition representing prosecution’s view is applicable to many cases the defendant forced the doorwindow with his screwdriver the proposition representing defence’s view are more variable depending on what is alleged to have happened.
in a direct transfer experiment the defendant owned and used the screwdriver but he did not force the doorwindow in question.
an unknown person used the defendant’s stolen screwdriver.
in an indirect transfer experiment the defendant neither owned saw nor used the screwdriver nor did they force the door or window.
instead an unknown individual—someone with whom the defendant had interacted e.g.
by shaking hands or touching the same objects—used the recovered tool to force entry.
in the first experiment if the defendant forced the doorwindow then she is the last handler of the screw driver whereas if the tool was stolen and used by an unknown person the defendant is the first handler.
for the second experiment given the defence view the defendant never held the screwdriver.
we envisaged the situation where an object manipulated by the defendant or the defendant himselfherself would be touched by the unknown offender who would then force the window.
the time delay between the touching of the object and the forcing of the window was 0 1h and 2h.
this was accomplished by handshaking experiments where the person forcing the door would shake a person’s hand and then use the screwdriver either immediately after handshake or after 1 2 hours.
it was found for the direct transfer experiment that unless a single contributor profile aligning with the known person’s of interest profile was retrieved the results did not allow to discriminate propositions.
on the other hand for the indirect transfer experiment both single and major contributor profiles that aligned with the person of interest poi supported the proposition that the person used the tool rather than an unknown person who had touched an object when indeed the former was true.
there was considerable variation in median recoveries of dna between laboratories between 200pg  5ng for a given experiment if quantities are taken into account.
these differences affect the likelihood ratios given activity level propositions.
more than 2700 samples were analysed in the course of this study.
two different bayesian networks are made available via an open source application written in shiny r shinyreact.
for comparison all datasets were analysed using a qualitative method categorised into absent single balanced or major given contributors."
"in developing epithelia cells become planar polarised with asymmetric localisation of the core planar polarity proteins to opposite cell membranes where they form stable intercellular complexes.
current models differ regarding the signalling mechanisms required for core protein polarisation.
here we investigate the existence of cellintrinsic cellscale signalling in vivo in the drosophila pupal wing.
we use conditional and restrictive expression tools to spatiotemporally manipulate core protein activity combined with quantitative measurement of core protein distribution polarity and stability.
our results provide evidence for a robust cellscale signal while arguing against mechanisms that depend on depletion of a limited pool of a core protein or polarised transport of core proteins on microtubules.
furthermore we show that polarity propagation across a tissue is hard highlighting the strong intrinsic capacity of individual cells to establish and maintain planar polarity."
"protein sulfation can be crucial in regulating proteinprotein interactions but remains largely underexplored.
sulfation is nearisobaric to phosphorylation making it particularly challenging to investigate using mass spectrometry.
the degree to which tyrosine sulfation sy is misidentified as phosphorylation py is thus an unresolved concern.
this study explores the extent of sy misidentification within the human phosphoproteome by distinguishing between sulfation and phosphorylation based on their mass difference.
using gaussian mixture models gmms we screened 45m peptidespectrum matches psms from the peptideatlas human phosphoproteome build for peptidoforms with mass error shifts indicative of sulfation.
this analysis pinpointed 104 candidate sulfated peptidoforms backedup by gene ontology go terms and custom terms linked to sulfation.
false positive filtering by manual annotation resulted in 31 convincing peptidoforms spanning 7 known and 7 novel sy sites.
y47 in calumenin was particularly intriguing since mass error shifts acidic motif conservation and ms2 neutral loss patterns characteristic of sulfation but not phosphorylation provided strong evidence that this site can only be sulfated.
overall although misidentification of sulfation in phosphoproteomics datasets derived from cell and tissue intracellular extracts can occur it appears relatively rare and should not be considered a confounding factor for highquality phosphoproteomics studies."
"bumblebees rely on visual memories acquired during the first outbound flights to relocate their nest.
while these learning flights have been extensively studied in sparse environments with few objects little is known about how bees adapt their flight in more dense cluttered settings that better mimic their natural habitats.
here we investigated how environmental complexity influences the first outbound flights of bumblebees.
in a large arena we tracked the bees 3d positions to examine the flight patterns body orientations and nest fixations across environmental conditions characterised by different  object constellations around the nest entrance.
in cluttered environments bees prioritised altitude gain over horizontal distance suggesting a strategy to overcome obstacles and visual clutter.
body orientation patterns became more diverse in dense environments indicating a balance between nestoriented learning and obstacle avoidance.
notably bees consistently preferred to fixate the location of the nest entrance from elevated positions above the dense environment across all conditions.
our results reveal significant changes in 3d flight structure body orientations and nest fixation behaviours as object density increases.
this highlights the importance of considering threedimensional space and environmental complexity in understanding insect navigation."
"viral mimicry refers to the activation of innate antiviral immune responses due to the induction of endogenous retroelement re expression.
viral mimicry has been previously described to augment antitumor immune responses and sensitize solid tumors to immunotherapy including colorectal cancer melanoma and clear renal cell carcinoma.
here we found that targeting a novel master epigenetic regulator zinc finger protein 638 znf638 induces viral mimicry in glioblastoma gbm preclinical models and potentiates immune checkpoint inhibition ici.
znf638 recruits the hush complex which precipitates repressive h3k9me3 marks on endogenous res.
in gbm znf638 is associated with marked locoregional immunosuppressive transcriptional signatures reduced endogenous re expression and poor immune cell infiltration cd8 tcells dendritic cells.
znf638 knockdown decreased h3k9trimethylation increased cytosolic dsrna and activated intracellular dsrnasignaling cascades rigi mda5 and irf3.
furthermore znf638 knockdown upregulated antiviral immune programs and significantly increased pdl1 immune checkpoint expression in patientderived gbm neurospheres and diverse murine models.
importantly targeting znf638 sensitized mice to ici in syngeneic murine orthotopic models through innate interferon signaling.
this response was recapitulated in recurrent gbm rgbm samples with radiographic responses to checkpoint inhibition with widely increased expression of dsrna pdl1 and perivascular cd8 cell infiltration suggesting dsrnasignaling may mediate response to immunotherapy.
finally we showed that low znf638 expression was a biomarker of clinical response to ici and improved survival in rgbm patients and melanoma patients.
our findings suggest that znf638 could serve as a target to potentiate immunotherapy in gliomas."
"the rise of spatial transcriptomics st is transforming our understanding of tumor heterogeneity by enabling highresolution locationspecific mapping of gene expression across the tumor microenvironment.
however the translational potential of spatial transcriptomics is still limited by its high cost hindering the assembly of large patient cohorts needed for robust biomarker discovery.
here we present path2space a deep learning model trained on spatial transcriptomics data to predict spatial gene expression directly from histopathology slides.
studying breast cancer the model was first trained on one st breast cancer patients cohort and further independently tested and validated on two other st cohorts.
path2space identifies 4500 genes whose spatial expression is robustly predicted in all three cohorts markedly more accurate than existing st predictors.
second we show that based on the inferred st path2space accurately infers celltype abundances in the tumor microenvironment tme.
thirdly applying path2space to the tcga breast cancer cohort we identify three tme spatially grounded subsets of patients that have markedly different survival rates.
fourth analyzing two large breast cancer patients cohorts treated with trastuzumab we show that the heterogeneity of the inferred her2 levels across the tumor microenvironment is predictive of response concordant with the bystander hypothesis.
finally we developed a spatially interpretable model for predicting trastuzumab response directly from the heslides.
this models performance surpasses that of existing response prediction models that use measured bulk multiomics data.
path2space is the first approach capable of robustly delineating the tumor microenvironment on an unprecedented scale directly from the tumor slides.
it heralds the upcoming development of robust spatially grounded biomarkers of patients survival and treatment that promises to transform precision oncology in both the developed and developing worlds."
"despite advances in peptide and protein design the rational design of membranespanning peptides that form conducting channels remains challenging due to our imperfect understanding of the sequencetostructure relationships that drive membrane insertion assembly and conductance.
here we describe the design and computational and experimental characterization of a series of coiled coilbased peptides that form transmembrane αhelical barrels."
"species distribution models sdms are crucial tools for understanding and predicting biodiversity patterns yet they often struggle with limited data biased sampling and complex speciesenvironment relationships.
here i present nicheflow a novel foundation model for sdms that leverages generative ai to address these challenges and advance our ability to model and predict species distributions across taxa and environments.
nicheflow employs a twostage generative approach combining species embeddings with two chained generative models one to generate a distribution in environmental space and a second to generate a distribution in geographic space.
this architecture allows for the sharing of information across species and captures complex nonlinear relationships in environmental space.
i trained nicheflow on a comprehensive dataset of reptile distributions and evaluated its performance using both standard sdm metrics and zeroshot prediction tasks.
nicheflow demonstrates good predictive performance particularly for rare and datadeficient species.
the model successfully generated plausible distributions for species not seen during training showcasing its potential for zeroshot prediction.
the learned species embeddings captured meaningful ecological information revealing patterns in niche structure across taxa latitude and range sizes.
as a proofofprinciple foundation model nicheflow represents a significant advance in species distribution modeling offering a powerful tool for addressing pressing questions in ecology evolution and conservation biology.
its ability to model joint species distributions and generate hypothetical niches opens new avenues for exploring ecological and evolutionary questions including ancestral niche reconstruction and community assembly processes.
this approach has the potential to transform our understanding of biodiversity patterns and improve our capacity to predict and manage species distributions in the face of global change."
"the emergence of a chemical system capable of selfreplication and evolution is a critical event in the origin of life.
rna polymerase ribozymes could constitute such a system but their large size and structural complexity hinder their selfreplication and make their spontaneous emergence improbable.
here we describe qt45 a 45nucleotide ribozyme discovered from a random sequence pool that catalyzes general rnatemplated rna synthesis using trinucleotide triphosphate substrates.
qt45 can synthesize both its complementary strand from a mix of all 64 trinucleotides and a copy of itself using 13 defined trinucleotides and one hexamer as substrates.
the discovery of this complex activity in a small ribozyme suggests that polymerase ribozymes may be more abundant in rna sequence space than anticipated thereby facilitating the emergence of selfreplication."
"common stochastic models of gene expression predict the analytical distribution of the mrna level per cell but not at subcellular resolution.
here for a wide class of models of transcription initiation we obtain an exact steadystate solution for the joint distribution of nuclear and cytoplasmic mrna levels per cell.
correcting the solution for extrinsic noise and fitting to single human cell data we precisely quantify the extent of bursty expression in thousands of genes and associate it with their biological functions"
"united nations predicted forthcoming food scarcity creates an urgency in research to assess and improve agriculturally important plant yield under environmental stress conditions.
in this context lignans are potential defensive substances that accumulate in plants during abiotic stresses.
flax"
"the traits that affect evolvability are subject to indirect selection as these traits affect the course of evolution over many generations rather than the direct replicative fitness of an individual.
however the evolution of evolvabilitydetermining traits is often difficult to study because putative evolvability alleles often have confounding direct fitness effects of unknown origin and size.
here we study theoretically and experimentally the evolution of mutation rates in proofreading polymerases with orthogonal control of direct and indirect selection.
mutagenic dna polymerases enjoy a longtime fitness advantage by enhancing the rate of acquiring beneficial mutations.
however this is offset by a shorttime fitness penalty which we trace to a counterintuitive tradeoff between mutation rates and activity in proofreading polymerases.
since these fitness effects act on different timescales no one number characterizes the fitness of a mutator allele.
we find unusual dynamic features in the resulting evolutionary dynamics such as kinetic exclusion selection by dynamic environments and rockpaperscissors dynamics in the absence of ecology.
our work has implications for the evolution of mutation rates and more broadly evolution in the context of an anticorrelation between mutation rates and short term fitness."
"microorganisms can enhance nutrient acquisition or suppress diseases from pathogens while plants can provide carbon resources and oxygen to rootassociated microbes.
however human activities have altered nutrient cycles and disrupted such mutualisms.
therefore we need to understand how to promote positive plantmicrobe associations to aid in restoring coastal wetland ecosystems where human stressors and climate change e.g.
hurricanes sealevel rise challenge restoration outcomes.
this study seeks to examine how salinity stressors influence plantmicrobe relationships where we hypothesize that the presence of microbes will buffer salinity stressor effects.
we used a whole sediment inocula approach to test this hypothesis.
we exposed marsh cordgrass sporobolus alterniflorus plugs to a replicated factorial experiment with three levels of microbiome addition microbial inocula autoclaved microbial inocula no microbe control and two levels of salinity 0.5 psu 20 psu replicated ten times.
we added microbial inocula from the marsh site with autoclaved soilless media and exposed half the plugs to saltwater 20 psu and half to freshwater 0.5 psu.
results revealed that marsh microbial inocula additions during early plant development may ameliorate salinity stressors and could be critical for future restoration efforts.
the addition of marsh microbial inocula provided a rescue effect from salinity stress observed in plant height and aboveground biomass.
belowground biomass bacterial diversity and bacterial evenness were similar across microbial and water treatments anova ns however the main effects of water permanova r20.100 p0.001 and microbial permanova r20.086 p0.001 treatments significantly influenced the bacterial community composition.
this work provides evidence that microbial stewardship is essential for buffering against environmental stressors and could promote plant establishment for wetland restoration."
"during development and tissue repair cells reshape and reconfigure to ensure organs take specific shapes.
this process is inherently threedimensional 3d.
yet in part due to limitations in imaging and data analysis cell shape analysis within tissues have been studied as a twodimensional 2d approximation .. the  wing disc.
with recent advances in imaging and machine learning there has been significant progress in our understanding of 3d cell and tissue shape .
however even after gaining 3d segmentation of cells it remains challenging to extract cell shape metrics beyond volume and surface area for cells within densely packed tissues.
in order to extract 3d shape metrics we have developed cellmet.
this userfriendly tool enables extraction of quantitative shape information from 3d cell and tissue segmentation.
it is developed for extracting cell scale information from densely packed tissues such as cell face properties cell twist and cell rearrangements.
our method will improve the analysis of 3d cell shape and the understanding of cell organisation within tissues.
our tool is open source available at ."
"the caucasian dwarf goby  cf.
is a new invasive alien gobiidae spreading in the lower rhine since 2019. little is known about the invasion biology of the species and further investigations to reconstruct the invasion history are lacking genomic resources.
we assembled a highquality chromosomescale reference genome of  cf."
"expression quantitative trait loci eqtls provide a key bridge between noncoding dna sequence variants and organismal traits.
the effects of eqtls can differ among tissues cell types and cellular states but these differences are obscured by gene expression measurements in bulk populations.
we developed a onepot approach to map eqtls in"
"heavy metal atpase 4 hma4 is required for the naturally selected traits of zinccadmium hyperaccumulation and hypertolerance of in arabidopsis halleri.
cisregulatory alterations and tandem triplication of ahhma4 result in substantially elevated transcript levels compared to the closely related nontolerant nonhyperaccumulator arabidopsis thaliana.
here we identify cisregulatory metal hyperaccumulation elements mhes necessary for ahhma4 promoter activity employing sequence comparisons and motif elicitation analyses combined with progressive deletions and sitedirected mutagenesis of promoterreporter constructs.
we report that the promoters of all ahhma4 gene copies share a distal mhe1 consensus tgtaac and a proximal pair of mhe2s identical or highly similar to the evening element aaaatatct.
evening elements are known binding sites of arabidopsis circadian clockassociated 1 cca1 a phytochromeregulated transcription factor in the core circadian clock.
we show that the promoter of each ahhma4 gene copy but not of athma4 mediates enhanced transcript levels of the reporter and their diel rhythmicity.
these functional characteristics are cca1dependent and recapitulated by a synthetic reporter construct placing the mhe2 pair into the athma4promoter sequence context according to the example of the ahhma41 promoter.
consistent with our observations in transgenic reporter lines ahhma4 transcript levels follow a diel rhythm in wildtype a. halleri plants.
different from a. halleri we identify complex repressive functionalities colocalizing with an upstream lncrna and an intron in the 5′ untranslated region of a. thaliana hma4.
in summary our work exemplifies how cisregulatory mutations contributed to the evolution of extreme physiological traits through the cooption of the circadian clock regulatory network."
"the evolutionary introduction of asymmetric cell division acd into the developmental program facilitates the formation of a new cell type contributing to developmental diversity and eventually to species diversification.
the micromere of the sea urchin embryo may serve as one of those examples an acd at the 16cell stage forms micromeres unique to echinoids among echinoderms.
we previously reported that a polarity factor activator of gprotein signaling ags plays a crucial role in micromere formation.
however ags and its associated acd factors are present in all echinoderms and across most metazoans leaving a question of what evolutionary modification of ags protein or its surrounding molecular environment contributed to the evolutionary acquisition of micromeres only in echinoids.
in this study we learned that the goloco motifs at the ags cterminus play critical roles in regulating micromere formation in sea urchin embryos.
further other echinoderms ags or chimeric ags that contain the cterminus of ags orthologs from various organisms showed varied localization and function in micromere formation.
in contrast the sea star or the pencil urchin orthologs of other acd factors were consistently localized at the vegetal cortex in the sea urchin embryo suggesting that ags may be a unique variable factor that facilitates acd diversity among echinoderms.
consistently sea urchin ags appears to facilitate micromerelike cell formation and accelerate the enrichment timing of the germline factor vasa during early embryogenesis of the pencil urchin an ancestral type of sea urchin.
based on these observations we propose that the molecular evolution of a single polarity factor facilitates acd diversity while preserving the core acd machinery among echinoderms and beyond during evolution."
"an outstanding question in the evolution of gene expression is the relative influence of neutral processes versus natural selection including adaptive change driven by directional selection as well as stabilizing selection which may include compensatory dynamics.
these forces shape patterns of gene expression variation within and between species including the regulatory mechanisms governing expression in cis and trans.
in this study we interrogate intraspecific gene expression variation among seven wild c. elegans strains with varying degrees of genomic divergence from the reference strain n2 leveraging this systems unique advantages  to comprehensively evaluate gene expression evolution.
by capturing allelespecific and betweenstrain changes in expression we characterize the regulatory architecture and inheritance mode of gene expression variation within c. elegans and assess their relationship to nucleotide diversity genome evolutionary history gene essentiality and other biological factors.
we conclude that stabilizing selection is a dominant influence in maintaining expression phenotypes within the species and the discovery that genes with higher overall expression tend to exhibit fewer expression differences supports this conclusion as do widespread instances of cis differences compensated in trans.
moreover analyses of human expression data replicate our finding that higher expression genes have less variable expression.
we also observe evidence for directional selection driving expression divergence and that expression divergence accelerates with increasing genomic divergence.
to provide community access to the data from this first analysis of allelespecific expression in c. elegans we introduce an interactive web application where users can submit genespecific queries to view expression regulatory pattern inheritance mode and other information httpswildworm.biosci.gatech.eduase."
"endosymbiotic reproductive manipulators are widely studied as sources of postzygotic isolation in arthropods but their effect on prezygotic isolation between genetically differentiated populations has garnered less attention.
we tested this using two partially isolated populations of the red and green colour forms of"
"genes expressed in gametes that mediate sperm interaction with the mammalian egg are of considerable interest to evolutionary biologists because the evolution of such genes can account for variation in reproductive compatibility between mates and reproductive isolation between species.
the human orthologs of such genes are also potential targets for both contraception and treatment of infertility.
one gene system of particular interest is the spermbinding genes of the inner egg coat or zona pellucida zp2 zp3 and their cognate protein in the mouse sperm acrosome zp3r.
previous population genetic analyses in humans pointed toward three balanced polymorphisms one in each gene zp2 zp3 and zp3r as potential targets of some form of balancing selection in the evolution of human fertility.
we tested that association using genetic analysis of couples seeking fertility assistance but we could not reject the null hypothesis of no association between balanced polymorphisms and infertility.
our study was based on a small sample of couples but the data were sound the allele frequencies at those three balanced polymorphisms were not different from random expectation in that clinical sample.
if an effect of those allele frequencies on infertility exists it is probably small.
our study was based in part on an old error in gene annotation that was only recently discovered after the start of participant recruitment for this genetic analysis and this error may account for our results which argue against a role for balancing selection on those three genes in humans."
"diacylglycerols dags are used for metabolic purposes and are tightly regulated secondary lipid messengers in eukaryotes.
dag subspecies with different fattyacyl chains are proposed to be involved in the activation of distinct pkc isoforms resulting in diverse physiological outcomes.
however the molecular players and the regulatory origin for finetuning the pkc pathway are unknown.
here we show that dip2 a conserved dag regulator across fungi and animalia has emerged as a modulator of pkc signalling in yeast.
dip2 maintains the level of a specific dag subpopulation required for the activation of pkcmediated cell wall integrity pathway.
interestingly the canonical dagmetabolism pathways being promiscuous are decoupled from pkc signalling.
we demonstrate that these dag subspecies are sourced from a phosphatidylinositol pool generated by the acylchain remodelling pathway.
furthermore we provide insights into the intimate coevolutionary relationship between the regulator dip2 and the effector pkc of dagbased signalling.
hence our study underscores the establishment of dip2pkc axis about 1.2 billion years ago in opisthokonta which marks the rooting of the first specific dagbased signalling module of eukaryotes."
"submerged cultures of undifferentiated or transformed epithelial cells are widely used in respiratory research due to their ease of use and scalability.
however these systems fail to capture the cellular diversity of the human airway epithelium.
in this study we developed an in vitro model where cryopreserved human nasal epithelial cells collected by brushings are differentiated under submerged conditions on standard plastic cultureware.
by applying smallmolecule inhibitors targeting notch and bmp signaling we achieved efficient differentiation of cultures containing basal secretory and ciliated cells.
this approach supports scalable culturing of both 2d epithelial monolayers and 3d organoids validated as personalized disease models for primary ciliary dyskinesia cystic fibrosis and respiratory syncytial virus infection.
this model offers a costeffective scalable platform that combines the simplicity of traditional cultures with the cellular complexity of the human airway epithelium providing a valuable tool for respiratory disease research."
"understanding the relative importance of biotic interactions multiple environmental drivers and neutral processes in shaping community diversity and composition is a central question for both theoretical and applied ecology.
we analysed a dataset describing 125 earthworm communities sampled in 10 localities in french guiana.
dna barcodes were used to delimit operational taxonomic units otus that we considered as species surrogates to avoid the taxonomic deficit and calculate communityscale species richness and pairwise sorensen betadiversity.
we used logratio and generalised linear models to highlight the effects of biotic interactions and environment as drivers of alpha diversity and generalised dissimilarity models to figure out the relative contribution of space and environment to betadiversity at different spatial extents.
communityscale alpha diversity was mainly explained by habitat filtering soil texture and interspecific competition that limit the number of locally coexisting species.
beta diversity between pairs of communities was mainly explained by distance when comparing communities in similar habitats by topography and available soil phosphorus when comparing communities in different habitats and by distance elevation and climate when comparing all possible pairs of communities.
while community composition is determined locally by neutral processes and environmental filtering biogeographic processes linked to dispersal limitation and adaptation to local environment are the most influential on a regional scale.
this highlights the complex interplay of dispersal limitation biotic interactions and environmental filtering during the process of community assembly."
"tissue engineering strategies predominantly rely on the production of living substitutes whereby implanted cells actively participate in the regenerative process.
beyond cost and delayed graft availability the patientspecific performance of engineered tissues poses serious concerns on their clinical translation ability.
a more exciting paradigm consists in exploiting celllaid engineered extracellular matrices eecm which can be used as offtheshelf materials.
here the regenerative capacity solely relies on the preservation of the eecm structure and embedded signals to instruct an endogenous repair.
we recently described the possibility to exploit custom human stem cell lines for eecm manufacturing.
in addition to the conferred standardization the availability of such cell lines opened avenues for the design of tailored eecms by applying dedicated genetic tools.
in this study we demonstrated the exploitation of crisprcas9 as a high precision system for editing the composition and function of eecms.
human mesenchymal stromalstem cell hmsc lines were modified to knockout vegf and runx2 and assessed for their capacity to generate osteoinductive cartilage matrices.
we report the successful editing of hmscs subsequently leading to targeted vegf and runx2knockout cartilage eecms.
despite the absence of vegf eecms retained full capacity to instruct ectopic endochondral ossification.
conversely runx2edited eecms exhibited impaired hypertrophy reduced ectopic ossification and superior cartilage repair in a rat osteochondral defect.
in summary our approach can be harnessed to identify the necessary eecm factors driving endogenous repair.
our work paves the road towards the compositional eecms editing and their exploitation in broad regenerative contexts."
"the vaginal microbiomes role in risk progression and treatment of female cancers has been widely explored.
yet there remains a need to develop methods to understand the interaction of microbiome factors with host cells and to characterize their potential therapeutic functions.
to address this challenge we developed a systems biology framework we term the pharmacobiome for microbiome pharmacology analysis.
the pharmacobiome framework evaluates similarities between microbes and microbial byproducts and known drugs based on their impact on host transcriptomic cellular signatures.
here we apply our framework to characterization of the antigynecologic cancer vaginal pharmacobiome.
using published vaginal microbiome multiomics data from the partners prep clinical trial we constructed vaginal epithelial gene signatures associated with each profiled vaginal microbe and metabolite.
we compared these microbiomeassociated host gene signatures to postdrug perturbation host gene signatures associated with 35 fdaapproved anticancer drugs from the library of integrated networkbased cellular signatures database to identify vaginal microbes and metabolites with high statistical and functional similarity to these drugs.
we found that lactobacilli and their metabolites can regulate host gene expression in ways similar to many anticancer drugs.
additionally we experimentally tested our model prediction that taurine a metabolite produced by l. crispatus kills cancerous breast and endometrial cancer cells.
our study shows that the pharmacobiome is a powerful framework for characterizing the anticancer therapeutic potential of vaginal microbiome factors with generalizability to other cancers microbiomes and diseases."
" deep vein thrombosis dvt is the formation of a blood clot in a deep vein.
dvt can lead to a venous thromboembolism vte the combined term for dvt and pulmonary embolism a leading cause of death and disability worldwide.
despite the prevalence and associated morbidity of dvt the underlying causes are not well understood."
" biological control is a sustainable strategy to combat agricultural pests.
yet due to legislation importing nonnative biocontrol agents is increasingly restricted.
thus selective breeding of biocontrol traits of native species is suggested to enhance performance of existing biocontrol agents.
genomic prediction is a new alternative to exploit genetic variation for improving biocontrol efficacy.
this study aims to establish proofofprinciple for genomic prediction in insect biocontrol agents using wing morphology traits in the parasitoid"
"all cells are encapsulated by a lipid membrane which facilitates the interaction between life and its environment.
how life exploits the diverse mixtures of lipids that dictate membrane property and function has been experimentally challenging to address.
we introduce an approach to tune and minimize lipidomes in  and the minimal cell jcvisyn3a revealing that a 2component lipidome can support life.
systematically reintroducing phospholipid features demonstrated that acyl chain diversity is more critical for growth than head group diversity.
by tuning lipid chirality we explored the lipid divide between archaea and the rest of life showing that ancestral lipidomes could have been heterochiral.
our approach offers a tunable minimal membrane system to explore the fundamental lipidomic requirements for life thereby extending the concept of minimal life from the genome to the lipidome."
"the current study aimed to optimize the fasting duration in order to mitigate the detrimental effects of heat stress on broilers raised in hot and humid climatic environments.
a total of 500 broiler docs were assigned to five distinct treatment groups tₒ nonfasted controlled temperature 2426℃ nfct t nonfasted heat stressed 3038℃ nfhs t 6 hours fasted heat stressed 6h fhs t 8 hours fasted heat stressed 8h fhs and t"
" sp nov a new species of subterranean eel loach is described from kerala india.
it is distinguished from its subterranean congeners by the presence of a dorsal fin four pectoral rays and five segmented anal fin rays.
genetic analyses suggest that"
"peerreview and publication are important parts of the scientific enterprise and research has shown that engaging students in such scholarly practices helps build their sense of belonging and scientific identity.
yet these disciplinary literacy skills and professional practices are often part of the hidden curriculum of science research thus excluding students and others from fully understanding ways in which scientific knowledge is constructed refined and disseminated even though students are participating in such activities.
secondary students are increasingly involved in scientific research projects that include authentic disciplinary literacy components such as research proposals posters videos and scientific research papers.
more and more students are also engaging in professional practice of publishing their scientific research papers through dedicated secondary science journals.
how teachers and other mentors support the development of professional disciplinary literacies in students is critical to understand as part of supporting more student participation in research.
to this end we used a mixed methods study of interviews and surveys to examine the experience and conceptions of the mentors teachers and professional scientists who guided precollege students through the writing and publication of their scientific research projects.
analyzing our data from a lens of cognitive apprenticeship we find that mentors encourage independence by primarily employing the method of “exploration”.
we also find that mentors have divergent views on the value of publication within science versus for student scientists specifically.
our findings suggest that mentors could work to explicitly reveal their own thinking within science writing to provide more sequenced support for student scientists."
"extinction is considered a core mechanism underlying exposurebased therapy in anxietyrelated disorders.
however marked impairments in threat extinction learning coupled with impaired neuroplasticity in patients strongly impede the efficacy of exposurebased interventions.
recent translational research suggests a role of the reninangiotensin ra system in both these processes.
however the efficacy of pharmacological modulation of the ra system to enhance threat extinction in humans and the underlying neural mechanisms remain unclear.
the present preregistered randomized placebocontrolled pharmacological neuroimaging trial demonstrates that preextinction administration of the angiotensin ii type 1 receptor antagonist losartan accelerated attenuation of the psychophysiological threat response during extinction.
on the neural level the acceleration of extinction was accompanied by threatsignal specific enhanced ventromedial prefrontal cortex vmpfc activation and its coupling with the basolateral amygdala.
multivoxel pattern analysis and voxelwise mediation analysis further revealed that that losartan reduced the neural threat expression particularly in the vmpfc and confirmed that acceleration of extinction critically involved treatmentinduced modulation of vmpfc activation.
overall the results provide the first evidence for a pivotal role of the ra system in extinction learning in humans and suggest that adjunct losartan administration can be leveraged to facilitate the efficacy of extinctionbased therapies."
"sporopollenin sp is a complex biopolymer in the outer cell wall of spores and pollen and provides protection from environmental stresses.
its extraordinary biological and chemical resistance has defied efforts to elucidate its chemical composition and structure.
this led to the adoption of broad and imprecise definitions of sp which encouraged claims for its widespread occurrence among diverse embryophyte and nonembryophyte taxa and also misguided research on the evolution of sp and its roles during terrestrialisation.
we previously proposed a more precise biochemical definition that can be used as a diagnostic tool to distinguish genuine sp from other chemically resistant cell wall materials.
the definition was centred on the possession of ascl antherspecific chalcone synthaselike an embryophytespecific enzyme of the polyketide pathway that provides precursors for sp biosynthesis.
herein we demonstrate that all five enzymes cyp703 cyp704 acos ascl and tkpr of the polyketide pathway are present in embryophytes but absent in green algae and propose a new more comprehensive definition of sp “sporopollenin is a chemically resistant complex heteropolymer present in the outer walls of spores and pollen grains and is composed partly of hydroxylated polyketides derived from the conserved polyketide pathway which typically involves cyp703a cyp704b acos ascl and tkpr.” furthermore we examine the evolution of all five enzymes of the polyketide pathway from ancestral enzymes of primary metabolism.
we discuss the coselection of acos ascl and tkpr and also provide evidence that gene dosage of all five genes in the pathway has been subjected to strict evolutionary control.
this study further signifies sp as an evolutionary innovation unique to the embryophyte lineage and encourages research on possible evolutionary relationships between genuine embryophyte sp and other ‘splike materials’ in reproductive bodies including algal zygospores and dinoflagellate cysts."
"the bloodbrain barrier bbb has unique endothelial cells and tight junctions that selectively regulate passage of molecules to the central nervous system cns to prevent pathogen entry and maintain neural homeostasis.
various neurological conditions and neurodegenerative diseases benefit from small molecules capable of bbb penetration bbbp to elicit a therapeutic effect.
predicting bbbp often involves in silico assessment of molecular properties such as lipophilicity logp and polar surface area psa using the cns multiparameter optimization mpo method.
this study curated an opensource dataset to rigorously benchmark machine learning ml and neural network nn models with each other and with mpo for predicting bbbp.
our analysis demonstrated that ai models especially attentive nns using stereochemical features significantly outperform mpo in predicting bbbp.
an attentive graph neural network gnn which we refer to as candidcns achieved a 0.230.26 higher auroc score than mpo on full test sets and a 0.170.19 higher score on stereoisomers filtered subsets.
regarding stereoisomers that differ in bbbp which mpo cannot distinguish candidcns correctly classifies these with aurpc auroc and mcc metrics comparable to or better than those of mpo on less difficult test molecules.
these findings suggest that integrating attentive gnn models such as candidcns into pharmaceutical drug discovery processes can substantially improve prediction rates and thereby reduce the timeline cost and increase the probability of success of designing brain penetrant therapeutics for the treatment of a wide variety of neurological and neurodegenerative diseases."
"gamete killers are genetic loci that distort segregation in the progeny of hybrids because the killer allele promotes the elimination of the gametes that carry the sensitive allele.
they are widely distributed in eukaryotes and are important for understanding genome evolution and speciation.
we had previously identified a pollen killer in hybrids between two distant natural accessions of"
"cuttingedge studies in live cell dynamics place increasing demands on microscopy imaging and focus stability during acquisition is a critical factor in obtaining highquality image data.
current autofocusing solutions are limited to focusing precision and range thus impeding their application in highaccuracy research.
here we introduce luna locking under nanoscale accuracy an innovative autofocusing method that leverages the coma pattern of detection light to characterize focus drift.
luna improves the focusing precision down to 3 nm and extends the focusing range to at least 40 times the objective depthoffocus.
these advancements enable us to investigate how bacteria adapt to temperature change at the singlecell level revealing a series of novel insights into bacterial cold shock response mechanisms.
this approach addresses the complexities of growth dynamics growth mode transition division synchronization and size regulation during the adaptation period which present significant challenges for traditional analytical methods.
notably the controversies between the growth lag of batch culture and continuous growth at the singlecell level are successfully explained based on scattering theory.
luna shows enhanced performance in improving existing advanced microscopy technologies and demonstrates excellent potential for expanding stateoftheart research in biology."
"background the metabolic syndrome mets is a cluster of some interrelated common clinical disorders including central obesity dyslipidemia hypertension and glucose intolerance.
central obesity accompanied by insulin resistance is a key factor for the development of metabolic syndrome.
adiponectin is an adiposespecific plasma protein secreted from adipocyte with antiatherogenic and insulinsensitizing activities.
purpose this study aimed to investigate the relationship of plasma adiponectin levels with metabolic syndrome related disorders and its drug repurposing through in silico approach.
materials and methods for this study 269 individuals were recruited with written consent.
the participants were selected based on their full medical history clinical examination and laboratory reports.
anthropometric measurements as well as blood pressure was measured before sample collection.
fasting blood samples were collected for the estimation of lipid profile blood glucose and serum adiponectin levels.
results our results show that the adiponectin levels in the subjects with mets were significantly lower than those of without mets p 0.0001. among the metabolic syndrome risk factors adiponectin levels were associated with hypertriglyceridemia and reduced hdlcholesterol p0.0001.
three drugs saquinavir candesartan and glimepiride were suggested to control the plasma adiponectin level in the subjects with mets.
conclusions since the plasma adiponectin levels are significantly lower in patients with mets it might be used as diagnostic  prognostic marker for mets disorder and adiponectin targeted drugs might be minimize the mets of the subjects."
"gamma delta γδ t cells are defined by their unique ability to recognize a limited repertoire of nonpeptide nonmhcassociated antigens on transformed and pathogeninfected cells.
in addition to their lack of alloreactivity γδ t cells exhibit properties distinct from other lymphocyte subsets prompting significant interest in their development as an offtheshelf cellular immunotherapeutic.
however their low abundance in circulation heterogeneity limited methods for ex vivo expansion and underdeveloped methodologies for genetic modification have hindered basic study and clinical application of γδ t cells.
here we implement a feederfree scalable approach for ex vivo manufacture of polyclonal nonvirally modified gene edited chimeric antigen receptor carγδ t cells in support of therapeutic application.
engineered carγδ t cells demonstrate high function in vitro and and in vivo.
longitudinal in vivo pharmacokinetic profiling of adoptively transferred polyclonal carγδ t cells uncover subsetspecific responses to il15 cytokine armoring and multiplex base editing.
our results present a robust platform for genetic modification of polyclonal carγδ t cells and present unique opportunities to further define synergy and the contribution of discrete engineered carγδ t cell subsets to therapeutic efficacy in vivo."
"in the developing mouse ventral spinal cord hes5 a transcription factor downstream of notch signalling is expressed as evenly spaced clusters of high hes5expressing neural progenitor cells along the dorsoventral axis.
while notch signalling requires direct membrane contact for its activation we have previously shown mathematically that contact needs to extend beyond neighbouring cells for the hes5 pattern to emerge.
however the presence of cellular structures that could enable such longdistance signalling was unclear.
here we report that cellular protrusions are present all along the apicobasal axis of individual neural progenitor cells.
through live imaging we show that these protrusions dynamically extend and retract reaching lengths of up to ∼20μm enough to extend membrane contact beyond adjacent cells.
the notch ligand dll1 was found to colocalise with protrusions further supporting the idea that notch signalling can be transduced at a distance.
the effect of protrusions on the hes5 pattern was tested by reducing the density of protrusions using the cdc42 inhibitor ml141 leading to a tendency to decrease the distance between high hes5 cell clusters.
however this tendency was not significant and leaves an open question about their role in the finegrained organisation of neurogenesis."
"singlecell rnaseq scrnaseq has transformed the study of cancer biology.
recent years have seen a rapid expansion in the number of singlecell cancer studies yet most of these studies profiled few tumours such that individual datasets have limited statistical power.
combining the data and results across studies holds great promise but also involves various challenges.
we recently began to address these challenges by curating a large collection of cancer scrnaseq datasets and leveraging it for systematic analyses of tumor heterogeneity.
here we significantly extend this repository to 124 datasets for over 40 cancer types together comprising 2822 samples with improved data annotations visualisations and exploration.
utilising this vast cohort we systematically quantified contextdependent gene expression and proliferation patterns across cell types and cancer types.
these data annotations and analysis results are all freely available for exploration and download via the curated cancer cell atlas 3ca website"
"insects provide a potential source of sustainable alternative protein that can help meet the protein demands of a growing population.
efficient farming of insects to meet this demand depends on an understanding of insect life history.
yet detailed information and expertise about a single species are not always available for practitioners to make informed decisions about rearing practices or identify arising issues.
the cricket"
"the puerto rican crested toad prct is puerto rico’s only endemic toad and has undergone rapid population decline within the last 40 years.
as a hedge against extinction captive assurance colonies have been established at several zoological institutions for breeding and reintroduction.
however reproductive output has remained low despite the use of hormone therapies to attempt to bypass missing abiotic cues and stimulate reproductive behaviors.
this low output necessitates a better understanding of natural fluctuations in gamete specifically sperm quality in captive individuals.
to generate an understanding of natural gametic cycles in captive prcts we administered male prcts n  86 housed under natural temperature and photoperiod cycles with exogenous hormones monthly for one year.
samples were analyzed for motility and concentration to assess variations in sperm quality by month.
spermiation was successfully stimulated every month but quality fluctuated sperm motility was highest in june and july while sperm concentration was highest in december january and march.
these results indicate that while hormones can be utilized to stimulate gamete production in prcts yearround sperm quality is not consistent.
furthermore the seasonal occurrence of peak sperm production of captive males differed from natural peaks reported for wild prcts.
our results illustrate the need for more biologically informed strategies for breeding of atrisk anuran populations."
"we describe a modular bondcentric approach to protein nanomaterial design inspired by the rich diversity of chemical structures that can be generated from the small number of atomic valencies and bonding interactions.
we design protein building blocks with regular coordination geometries and bonding interactions that enable the assembly of a wide variety of closed and opened nanomaterials using simple geometrical principles.
experimental characterization confirms successful formation of more than twenty multicomponent polyhedral protein cages 2d arrays and 3d protein lattices with a high 1050  success rate and electron microscopy data closely matching the corresponding design models.
because of the modularity individual building blocks can assemble with different partners to generate distinct regular assemblies resulting in an economy of parts and enabling the construction of reconfigurable systems."
"the plasticity of plant cells underlies their wide capacity to regenerate with increasing evidence in plants and animals implicating cell cycle dynamics in cellular reprogramming.
to investigate the cell cycle during cellular reprogramming we developed a comprehensive set of cell cycle phase markers in the arabidopsis root.
using singlecell rnaseq profiles and live imaging during regeneration we found that a subset of cells near an ablation injury dramatically increases division rate by truncating g1.
cells in g1 undergo a transient nuclear peak of glutathione gsh prior to coordinated entry into s phase followed by rapid divisions and cellular reprogramming.
a symplastic block of the ground tissue impairs regeneration which is rescued by exogenous gsh.
we propose a model in which gsh from the outer tissues is released upon injury licensing an exit from g1 near the wound to induce rapid cell division and reprogramming."
"protists are major functional players in the oceans.
timeresolved epipelagic protist successions remain poorly described in subtropical ecosystems limiting current understanding of food web dynamics and responses to environmental changes in these major worldocean regions.
here we used amplicon sequencing data and their traitbased annotation to examine the seasonality of planktonic protists in the subtropical gulf of aqaba northern red sea.
temperature and nutrients were identified as major drivers of succession.
marked seasonal shifts in protists were detected.
the warm stratified oligotrophic period spanning through spring and summer were dominated by heterotrophs including parasitic syndiniales.
by contrast nutrient influx during deep convectivemixing in winter triggered a progressive shift to photoautotrophic communities dominated by few chlorophyte genera.
ephemeral phytoplankton blooms were detected during the mixingtostratification transition.
deeper winter mixing resulted in larger blooms dominated by diatoms and coccolithophores relative to chlorophytes prevalent during shallower mixing.
this illustrates the impact of mixingdepth in the development and compostion of blooms.
comparisons with oceanwide rdna datasets indicate that the oligotrophic protist assemblages from the gulf of aqaba resemble those from warm openoceans.
this work provides a detailed assessment of the seasonality in protist communities and dominant functional strategies in a coastal subtropical planktonic ecosystem."
"proper stem cell targeting and differentiation is necessary for regeneration to succeed.
in organisms capable of whole body regeneration considerable progress has been made identifying wound signals initiating this process but the mechanisms that control the differentiation of progenitors into mature organs are not fully understood.
using the planarian as a model system we identify a novel function for  a map3k family member possessing both kinase and ubiquitin ligase domains to negatively regulate terminal differentiation of stem cells during eye regeneration.
inhibition of  caused the formation of multiple ectopic eyes within the head but without controlling overall head brain or body patterning.
by contrast other known regulators of planarian eye patterning like  and  also regulate head regionalization suggesting  acts distinctly.
eye resection and regeneration experiments suggest that unlike wnt signaling perturbation  inhibition did not shift the target destination of eye formation in the animal.
instead  ectopic eyes emerge in the regions normally occupied by migratory eye progenitors and the onset of ectopic eyes after  inhibition coincides with a reduction to eye progenitor numbers.
furthermore rnai dosing experiments indicate that progenitors closer to their normal target are relatively more sensitive to the effects of  implicating this factors in controlling the site of terminal differentiation.
eye phenotypes were also observed after inhibition of  and  identifying a putative pathway through which  prevents differentiation.
together these results suggest that"
"outbreaks of bordetella pertussis bp the causative agent of whooping cough continue despite broad vaccination coverage and have been increasing since vaccination switched from wholebp wp to acellular bp ap vaccines.
wp vaccination has been associated with more durable protective immunity and an induced th1 polarized memory t cell response.
here a multiomics approach was applied to profile the immune response of 30 wp and 31 apprimed individuals and identify correlates of t cell polarization before and after tdap booster vaccination.
we found that transcriptional changes indicating an interferon response on day 1 postbooster along with elevated plasma concentrations of ifnγ and interferoninduced chemokines that peaked at day 13 postbooster correlated best with the th1 polarization of the vaccineinduced memory t cell response on day 28. our studies suggest that wpprimed individuals maintain their th1 polarization through this early memory interferon response.
this suggests that stimulating the interferon pathway during vaccination could be an effective strategy to elicit a predominant th1 response in apprimed individuals that protects better against infection."
" sp nov a new species of subterranean eel loach is described from kerala india.
it is distinguished from its subterranean congeners by the presence of a dorsal fin four pectoral rays and five segmented anal fin rays.
genetic analyses suggest that  is closely related to  but is distinct in morphology particularly by the presence of a dorsal fin.
the low genetic distance and significant morphological difference between these two  species suggest that they have diverged from an immediate common ancestor and evolved distinct adaptations to subterranean niches.
exhibits less evolved troglobitic traits compared to  and  suggesting it could be a connecting species in the evolutionary transition from terrestrial to subterranean loaches.
this discovery provides evidence for possible subterranean speciation of fishes in underground habitats."
""
"pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase pdk 1 is one of four isozymes that inhibit the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetylcoa via pyruvate dehydrogenase.
pdk activity is elevated in fasting or starvation conditions to conserve carbohydrate reserves.
pdk has also been shown to increase mitochondrial fatty acid utilization.
in cardiomyocytes metabolic flexibility is crucial for the fulfillment of high energy requirements.
the pdk1 isoform is abundant in cardiomyocytes but its specific contribution to cardiomyocyte metabolism is unclear.
here we show that pdk1 regulates cardiomyocyte fuel preference by mediating triacylglycerol turnover in differentiated h9c2 myoblasts using lentiviral shrna to knockdown"
" protein accumulation is a hallmark of many neurodegenerative and muscular diseases.
desminrelated cardio myopathy drm a wellstudied model for cardiac muscle protein accumulation is an autosomal dominantinherited disease presenting with progressive muscle weakness reduced quality of life and shortened life span.
to date drm patients are treated symptomatically and there is no causal treatment available.
independent of the genetic cause most drm patients display intracellular accumulation of desmin and its chaperone αbcrystallin cryab.
we previously conducted an unbiased highthroughput screen to identify novel effectors that reduce cardiomyocyte aggregate levels and found that downregulation of janus kinase 1 jak1 resulted in lower aggregate load in neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes."
curcumin a polyphenolic compound derived from the plant
" carbapenemases kpcs are widespread βlactamases that are a major cause of clinical nonsusceptibility of gramnegative bacteria to carbapenems and other βlactam antibiotics.
ceftazidime combined with the βlactamase inhibitor avibactam cazavi has been effective for treating infections by kpcproducing bacteria but emergent kpc variants confer resistance to the combination.
taniborbactam and ledaborbactam are bicyclic boronate βlactamase inhibitors under development with cefepime and ceftibuten respectively to treat carbapenemresistant bacterial infections.
here we assessed the effects of clinically important kpc2 and kpc3 variants v240g d179y d179y t243m on the antibacterial activity of cefepimetaniborbactam feptan and ceftibutenledaborbactam ctbled and examined catalytic activity and inhibition of these variants.
feptan and ctbled were highly active against cazaviresistant engineered"
the caucasian dwarf goby
"biological invasions are among the major drivers of biodiversity and are increasing worldwide.
among the invasive species mammals have a particularly profound impact on native ecosystems.
as primary decomposers of mammalian feces dung beetles are critical in ecosystem functioning and their community structure is closely linked to their services.
however the introduction of invasive mammals threatens these beetles and potentially disrupts their ecosystem services.
therefore it is necessary to understand the resulting changes in communities.
we developed a novel population dynamics model focusing on the interactions among mammals feces and dung beetles.
our results indicate that such invasions increase the risk of extinction of specialist dung beetles that cannot utilize the feces of invasive mammals.
the risk of extinction is particularly high when generalist dung beetles show a preference for native feces leading to intensified interspecific competition for resources.
additionally  the extinction risk of specialist dung beetles increases when invasive mammals display irruptive population dynamics.
in conclusion our findings demonstrated that nonnative mammalian invasions disrupt the coexistence of native dung beetle communities potentially leading to losses in biodiversity and ecosystem function.
these risks should be considered in future empirical studies to evaluate the impact of invasive mammals on dung beetle communities."
"rna viruses play an important role in regulating their host and global biogeochemical cycling and auxiliary metabolic genes amgs are one of the main pathways by which viruses regulate hosts metabolism.
however the amgs encoded by global rna viruses are largely unexplored.
here we annotated rna viral genomes and identified amgs from recently published global rna virome datasets.
we found 274 amgs encoded by 243 rna viral genomes which accounts for only 0.008 of all 3216257 genomes investigated.
these amgs span 25 functional categories the most prevalent being translation energy metabolism membrane transport transcription replication and repair and signal transduction.
unlike dna viruses rna viruses tend to encode amgs influencing the genetic and environments information processing of their hosts with fewer amgs linked to nutrient cycling such as carbon and nitrogen metabolism.
in addition rna viruses encoding these amgs were taxonomically diverse spanning five established phyla the newly proposed phylum taraviricota and fourteen lucaprot supergroups.
host prediction indicated that most of these rna viruses encoding amgs infect eukaryotes while only a few of them including  and"
"affective experiences within academic contexts significantly influence educational outcomes.
despite this the literature reveals a gap in generalising these effects to specific classroom activities partly arising from the absence of suitable instruments to measure emotions in situational educational scenarios.
our study introduces an experience sampling method to measure sixteen discrete emotional states deriving two scales for positive and negative activating emotions.
grounded in psychological and neuroscientific theories that integrate emotion with cognition our research explores the interplay between prior knowledge preservice teachers’ anticipatory situational emotions and subsequent learning in an experimental science education context.
analysing data from 269 preservice teachers from diverse backgrounds stem and nonstem at the uppersecondary level we found that negative activating emotions are often rooted in nonstem backgrounds and exacerbated by limited prior science knowledge.
these negative emotions impact achievement and learning primarily through the mediating role of boredom.
furthermore our results indicate that the detrimental impact of boredom on achievement is significantly influenced by prior knowledge with a more pronounced effect on students with lower levels.
given that emotions are amenable to intervention our findings propose that specifically addressing boredom in students with low prior knowledge could amplify the benefits of educational strategies."
"vast sequencing data in public repositories offer researchers unprecedented opportunities for gaining insights through reanalysis and machine learning approaches thereby advancing the microbiology field.
however the lack of standardized metadata poses a significant obstacle to big data reuse necessitating advanced bioinformatics skills for curation and integration."
"recruitment of faculty members in academic departments shapes the department for decades in both research and teaching arenas.
having a diverse department is beneficial for undergraduate and graduate students as representation of underrepresented minority groups in the professoriate can inspire a greater diversity of students to pursue higher levels of education or researchfocused careers.
increased diversity benefits research directly as diverse teams have been shown to have better ideas and outcomes.
in 2020 our department had lower gender diversity than would be expected based on the pool of phd students and postdoctoral fellows in canada.
therefore we altered our hiring process primarily by redacting applications for recruitment into entrylevel tenuretrack faculty positions.
with this change in process female hires increased from 17 in the previous ten years 5 hires to 80 in the subsequent four years 5 hires with no substantial change in hiring of racially diverse individuals 50 to 40. overall combined with retirements the percentage of female faculty in the department went from 25 to 50 and the percentage of racialized faculty went from 38 to 44. the new hires have met or exceeded expectations of success with respect to grant funding and are on track to meet or exceed expectations for other metrics of success.
thus our intervention was very successful in increasing the diversity of our department within a short timeframe.
we believe that our experience could provide other departments with a template for making substantive change even in the absence of internal expertise in the area."
"instructors can provide feedback to their class in multiple ways.
one way is through their followup behaviors which are the specific strategies instructors implement after active learning activities.
these behaviors could play an important role in student learning as students can receive feedback from the instructor.
however there is little research on the effects of different types of followup behaviors.
followup after active learning can be seen as a form of discourse between the instructor and the entire class.
previous researchers developed the classroom discourse observation protocol cdop to analyze discourse between the instructor and individual students or small groups.
we used cdop as a starting point to develop and validate a new protocol the followup discourse observation protocol fudop to characterize instructional followup behaviors to the entire class after activelearning activities.
we then used fudop to characterize followup behaviors of multiple instructors in introductory biology courses at three different universities.
we measured consistent differences in these behaviors across instructors but not within instructors demonstrating that instructors may engage in consistent followup behaviors.
fudop could allow instructors and researchers to better measure and analyze followup behaviors and their effects which could in turn provide guidance to instructors and faculty developers."
"beneficial wild insects including pollinators encounter various pesticide exposure conditions from brief high concentrations to continuous lowlevel exposure.
to effectively assess the environmental risks of pesticides it is critical to understand how different exposure patterns influence their effects.
unfortunately this knowledge remains limited.
to clarify whether different exposure schemes disrupt the physiology of pollinators in similar manners we exposed bumble bees to acute and chronic treatments of three different pesticides acetamiprid clothianidin and sulfoxaflor.
gene expression profiling enabled us to compare the effects of these treatments on the brain in a highresolution manner.
there were two main surprises first acute and chronic exposure schemes affected largely nonoverlapping sets of genes.
second different pesticides under the same exposure scheme showed more comparable effects than the same pesticide under different exposure schemes.
acute exposure caused upregulation of stress response mechanisms causing distinct regulatory changes rather than amplifying the effects of prolonged lowdose exposure that affected predominantly immunity and energy metabolism.
these findings show that the mode of exposure critically determines the effects of pesticides.
our results signal the need for safety testing practices to better consider modeofexposure dependent effects and suggest that transcriptomics can support such improvements."
"microsporidia have long been proposed as biological agents for controlling disease vectors and the parasites they transmit.
however their study in vector biology has been constrained due to challenges in manipulating microsporidia within hosts.
in this study we investigated the effect of dexrazoxane a candidate drug against microsporidiosis on the establishment and development of  infection in its natural host the mosquito  the main malaria vector.
our findings show that dexrazoxane significantly reduces spore load particularly in mosquitoes reared individually without affecting the overall infection success of the parasite.
this result aligns with studies in"
under conditions of oxidative stress or iron starvation ironsulfur cluster biogenesis in
"ambrosia beetles and their fungal symbionts represent a widespread and diverse insectfungus mutualism.
this study investigates the genomic adaptations associated with the evolution of the ambrosia lifestyle across multiple fungal lineages.
we performed comparative genomic analyses on 70 fungal genomes from four families irpicaceae ceratocystidaceae nectriaceae and ophiostomataceae including 24 ambrosia and 34 nonambrosia lineages.
our phylogenomic analyses reveal multiple independent colonization of insect vectors by the fungi spanning from the midcretaceous 114.6 ma to the early quaternary 1.9 ma.
contrary to expectations for obligate symbionts ambrosia fungi showed no significant genomewide reductions in size gene count or secreted protein repertoire compared to their nonsymbiotic relatives.
instead we observed complex lineagespecific patterns of genomic adaptation.
key findings include lineagespecific expansions in carbohydrateactive enzyme families aa4 in nectriaceae ce4 in ophiostomataceae and gh3 in ophiostomataceae and ceratocystidaceae suggesting potential enhancement or loss of lignin modification hemicellulose deacetylation and cellulose degradation in different ambrosia lineages.
repeatinduced point mutation analysis revealed familyspecific patterns rather than lifestyleassociated differences.
these results highlight the diverse genomic strategies employed by ambrosia fungi demonstrating that symbiont evolution can proceed through refined lineagespecific changes rather than genomewide or convergent alterations.
our study suggests that unlike other insectfarmed fungi ambrosia fungi are not domesticated crops but rather freeliving fungi which coopted wood boring beetles as vectors via subtle lineagespecific adaptations."
"background agerelated hearing loss arhl is the most common sensory loss in older adults but the underlying pathological mechanisms remain unclear.
recent genome wide association studies gwas have linked variation in a large number of genes with increased risk of arhl for the first time.
amongst the strongest of these associations is variation in klhdc7b a gene of unknown function and one not previously linked to hearing.
methods to confirm whether klhdc7b plays a role in hearing we investigated auditory function in two independent knockout mutant mouse models of klhdc7b  klhdc7bimpc and klhdc7bdd on the c57bl6n background and the b6.castcdh23753ag background respectively.
the b6.castcdh23753ag background was backcrossed to correct a known agerelated hearing loss ahl mutation in cadherin 23 present in both the c57bl6n and c57bl6j strains.
results we showed that klhdc7b is expressed exclusively in inner and outer sensory hair cells within the cochlea of mice at the rna and protein level.
homozygous mutants for both knockout mouse models display a similar earlyonset progressive and severe hearing loss.
histological characterization of the two mouse models suggests that hair cells develop normally and are present in neonates.
however after the onset of hearing there is a progressive loss of outer hair cells in a gradient from base to apex of the cochlea consistent with the hearing deficit in the mice and the pattern of hearing loss in arhl.
inner hair cells remain intact up to the latest age examined 8 weeks.
conclusions our data suggests klhdc7b is required for maintenance of auditory function rather than in its development supporting the novel association with arhl in humans detected in recent gwas.
to our knowledge this is the first validation in mouse of an arhl association in humans detected in a gwas.
our work also provides two distinct mouse models to further investigate the role of klhdc7b in auditory function and for use in the development of therapeutic tools to prevent or treat arhl."
"ewing sarcoma is a highly aggressive solid malignancy affecting children and young adults.
ewing sarcoma is driven primarily by ewsr1fli1 a fusion oncoprotein that has been notoriously difficult to target with traditional pharmacologic agents.
there are numerous examples of preclinical promising combinations of small molecules that are never tested in pediatric clinical trials because agents fail to reach the market due to limited efficacy for common adult cancers.
moreover the effectiveness of singleagent therapies for cancer treatment is often limited.
to address these limitations we selected 28 compounds that were largely fda approved or in late stages of clinical development and known to regulate important pathways in ewing sarcoma.
we performed a drug screen in ewing sarcoma cell lines with 180 combinations of tyrosine kinase inhibitors cell cycle inhibitors and conventional chemotherapy.
the results of the screen revealed that a pi3k inhibitor copanlisib combined with a cdk46 inhibitor ribociclib exhibited strong synergistic antiewing sarcoma activity.
using proteomic methods such as a reversephase protein array and western immunoblotting we demonstrated that this combination induced a downregulation of the pi3kakt pathway as well as proteins involved in cell cycle regulation.
we further confirmed these in vitro data using bulk rnasequencing.
to evaluate the phenotypic effect of the pi3kcdk46 inhibition in ewing sarcoma lines we performed apoptosis and cell cycle analyses using flow cytometry and demonstrated that ribociclib primarily induced a g0g1 arrest with minimal effect on ewing cell viability but significantly enhanced the apoptotic effect of copanlisib treatment.
in a xenograft model of ewing sarcoma we demonstrated that the combination therapy significantly prolonged survival compared to treatment with either vehicle or singleagent therapy alone.
our findings identify a new candidate therapy combination for ewing sarcoma using fdaapproved drugs and provide a resource of additional potential synergistic combinations for future validation."
"antibiotic use is a key driver of antibiotic resistance.
understanding the quantitative association between antibiotic use and resulting resistance is important for predicting future rates of antibiotic resistance and for designing antibiotic stewardship policy.
however the useresistance association is complicated by “spillover” in which one population’s level of antibiotic use affects another population’s level of resistance via the transmission of bacteria between those populations.
spillover is known to have effects at the level of families and hospitals but it is unclear if spillover is relevant at larger scales.
we used mathematical modeling and analysis of observational data to address this question.
first we used dynamical models of antibiotic resistance to predict the effects of spillover.
whereas populations completely isolated from one another do not experience any spillover we found that if even 1 of interactions are between populations then spillover may have large consequences the effect of a change in antibiotic use in one population on antibiotic resistance in that population could be reduced by as much as 50. then we quantified spillover in observational antibiotic use and resistance data from us states and european countries for 3 pathogenantibiotic combinations finding that increased interactions between populations were associated with smaller differences in antibiotic resistance between those populations.
thus spillover may have an important impact at the level of states and countries which has ramifications for predicting the future of antibiotic resistance designing antibiotic resistance stewardship policy and interpreting stewardship interventions."
"the genomic basis of cladogenesis and adaptive evolutionary change has intrigued biologists for decades.
the unique insights gained from a genomelevel perspective have revealed a striking pattern of conserved macrosynteny within chromosomes across huge phylogenetic distances in animals yet progress in many lineages has been hampered by the absence of genomelevel data.
here we show that the tectonics of genome evolution in clitellates a clade composed of most freshwater and all terrestrial species of the phylum annelida is characterised by extensive genomewide scrambling that resulted in a massive loss of macrosynteny between marine annelids and clitellates to the point that ancient bilaterian linkage groups ie groups of genes inherited as a block in most bilaterian phyla are fully disrupted.
these massive rearrangements included the formation of putative neocentromeres with newly acquired transposable elements and preceded a further period of genomewide reshaping events including wholegenome duplications and massive macrosyntenic reshuffling between clitellate lineages potentially triggered by the loss of genes involved in genome stability and homeostasis of cell division.
notably while these rearrangements broke shortrange interactions observed between hox genes in marine annelids they were reformed as longrange interactions in clitellates.
these genomic rearrangements led to the relocation of genes and the formation of new chimeric genetic elements both of which may have contributed to the adaptation of clitellates to freshwater and terrestrial environments.
our findings provide evidence of a massive genomic reshaping within clitellates at 2d and 3d levels and suggest that synteny may not limit the structural evolution of this animal lineage.
our study thus suggests that the genomic landscape of clitellata resulted from a rare burst of genomic changes that ended a long period of stability that persists across large phylogenetic distances."
"rbfox1 regulates transcriptional networks linked to synaptic transmission and neurodevelopment.
mutations in the"
"desmosomes are transmembrane protein complexes that contribute to cellcell adhesion in epithelia and other tissues.
here we report the discovery of frequent genetic alterations in the desmosome in human cancers with the strongest signal seen in cutaneous melanoma where desmosomes are mutated in 70 of cases.
in primary but not metastatic melanoma biopsies the burden of coding mutations in desmosome genes associates with a strong reduction in desmosome gene expression.
analysis by spatial transcriptomics and protein immunofluorescence suggests that these expression decreases occur in keratinocytes in the microenvironment rather than in primary melanoma cells.
in further support of a microenvironmental origin we find that desmosome gene knockdown in keratinocytes yields markedly increased proliferation of adjacent melanoma cells in keratinocytemelanoma cocultures.
similar increases in melanoma proliferation are observed in media preconditioned by desmosomedeficient keratinocytes.
thus gradual accumulation of desmosome mutations in neighboring cells may prime melanoma cells for neoplastic transformation."
"in gramnegative bacterial sepsis excessive caspase 411 activation in response to circulating bacterial lipid lps endotoxemia can cause organ damage and mortality.
current inhibitors of caspase 411 also block caspase 1 activity and are therefore not appealing clinical candidates for treating gramnegative sepsis.
here we identify doubleunsaturated 182 cardiolipin as a selective inhibitor of caspase 411dependent inflammatory cytokine secretion and pyroptosis without affecting caspase1 responses.
cardiolipin targets the card domain of caspase 411 impeding its interaction with lps to restrain caspase 411 activation thereby suppressing endotoxemiainduced systemic inflammation in vivo.
thus we present cardiolipin as a promising candidate for preventing endotoxemiainduced sequelae in sepsis while preserving caspase1driven antimicrobial immune responses.
by identifying cardiolipin as a specific caspase 411 inhibitor we provide an urgentlyneeded tool for studying caspase 411 functions in inflammatory pathways and open the way to studies of noncanonical inflammasome regulation by endogenous cardiolipin."
 none of the authors have any financial interest or conflict of interest related to this research.
"the ability of organisms to respond plastically to environmental change remains one of the most challenging areas of ecological studies.
reasons for this include the complex nature of environmental cues and responses at the organismal level the costs that organisms face in performing phenotypic plasticity under different conditions and the individual capacity to respond which depends on many internal and external factors.
the special case in this regard is an example of the plastic body size response to temperature known as the temperaturesize rule tsr.
we used five clonal and three multiclonal experimental populations of the lecane inermis rotifer.
we measured two traits over a wide thermal range body size and population growth rate r. we investigated i the thermal conditions under which different experimental populations perform the tsr or canalize  no plasticity their body size ii how this response relates to a direct measure of fitness and iii whether this response varies with the thermal preferences of the studied organisms.
we found a relationship between body size and fitness confirming that the tsr is only performed within a certain thermal range beyond which body size is canalized.
we did not find the expected relationship between the strength of the tsr and the range of thermal tolerance but our results do not allow us to reject the existence of such a relationship.
additionally we found a relatively high repeatability of thermal tolerance in experimental populations in comparison with the previous studies.
finally we suggest the role of the level of genetic composition within a population in its ability to respond plastically to temperature.
this is the first study to describe in detail the special case of plasticity versus canalization for body size response to optimal and suboptimal temperatures in organisms that differ in their tolerance to temperature."
"c. elegans molting offers a powerful entry point to understanding developmentally programmed apical extracellular matrix remodeling.
however the gene regulatory network controlling this process remains poorly understood.
focusing on targets of nhr23 a key transcription factor that drives molting we confirmed the kunitz family protease inhibitor gene mlt11 as an nhr23 target.
through reporter assays we identified nhr23binding sites that are necessary and sufficient for epithelial expression.
we generated a translational fusion and demonstrated that mlt11 is localized to the cuticle and lined openings to the exterior vulva rectum mouth.
we created a set of strains expressing varied levels of mlt11 by deleting endogenous cisregulatory element sequences.
combined deletion of two cisregulatory elements caused developmental delay motility defects and failure of the cuticle barrier.
inactivation of mlt11 by rnai produced even more pronounced defects.
mlt11 is necessary to pattern every layer of the adult cuticle suggesting a broad patterning role prior to the formation of the mature cuticle.
together these studies provide an entry point into understanding how individual cisregulatory elements function to coordinate expression of oscillating genes involved in molting and how mlt11 ensures proper cuticle assembly."
"a variety of synthetic biology applications from environmental sensing to bioproduction would benefit from the ability to induce genomic alterations at low tunable rates.
sitespecific recombinases can be used to perform a variety of targeted dna modifications such as excisions inversions and integrations.
their specificity and efficiency are offset by leaky expression and challenges in engineering a dynamic range of recombination rates.
here we developed a tightly regulated titratable cre recombinase system that is tailored to achieve low recombination rates in"
"tumors often evolve to engage numerous strategies to circumvent detection by the immune system.
our group recently discovered elevated neolactoseries glycosphingolipids nsgsl surface levels as a possible immune evasion mechanism of tumors.
we demonstrated a direct disruption of both innate and adaptive antitumor immunity  when expression of nsgsls was upregulated on established target cells.
it remains unclear however whether  nsgsls play an active role in tumor development and can aid tumors in evading immune responses."
"tropical coral reefs are undergoing unprecedented degradation primarily due to the increasing intensity and frequency of marine heatwaves with climate change.
coral bleaching is a well–known ramification of marine heatwaves but rapid coral mortality is an emerging paradigm that visually manifests as the ′sloughing′ of tissue from the coral skeleton.
unlike coral bleaching coral tissue sloughing precludes any prospect of holobiont recovery beyond the initial onset indicating a life–or–death tipping point.
here we experimentally confirm this phenomenon occurs when temperatures increase within temporal windows of hours to days consistent with field observations.
through microscale measurements of dissolved oxygen in the diffusive boundary layers of two abundant keystone reef–building corals we demonstrate that rapid temperature increases coincide with intrinsic oxygen deprivation occurring before gross tissue disintegration or coral tissue sloughing.
we propose that this distinct phenomenon arises from rapid heating rendering the coral holobiont incapable of engaging in reactive processes to counteract the combined effects of heightened aerobic demands and impaired photosynthetic function.
the passive diffusion of o from the surrounding bulk water is likely insufficient to meet the holobionts requirements as explained by the einstein–smoluchowski kinetic theory of gases and brownian motion"
"withdrawal statements the authors have withdrawn their manuscript as they have discovered some potential inconsistencies in the analysis of the data.
therefore the authors do not wish this work to be cited as reference for the project."
"heat acclimation confers acquired thermotolerance at and heatacclimation memory ham is the maintenance of at for some time.
in arabidopsis and rice the heatstressassociated 32kda protein hsa32 and the protein disaggregase heat shock protein101 hsp101 form a positive feedback loop at the protein level to maintain at hsa32 mitigates hsp101 degradation and hsp101 positively regulates the accumulation of hsa32.
here we report the underpinning mechanism regarding how hsp101 affects the hsa32 level in arabidopsis.
we found that without hsp101 nascent hsa32 was rapidly degraded and the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib inhibited the degradation.
in response to heat stress the nascent hsa32gfp fusion protein was present in liquid condensates and diffused in the cytosol after returning to nonstress temperature.
proximity labeling with hsa32turboid identified hsp101 and five other protein chaperones and cochaperones as the primary interactors.
disturbing the interaction between hsa32 and hsp101 destabilized hsa32 and compromised ham.
hsa32 is predicted as a timbarrel protein with three intrinsically disordered regions of high aggregation propensity.
recombinant hsa32 expressed in e. coli was partitioned into insoluble fractions suggesting that hsa32 is aggregationprone.
our findings highlight how the interplay between an aggregationprone protein and a protein disaggregase can maintain plant stress memory."
" household residents in malaria endemic areas are at high risk of multiple malaria episodes per year.
this study investigated the annual household malaria episodes ahmes in three health districts in cameroon."
"towards developing quantitative models of antitumor activities of macrophages we evaluated the effects of cytokines tumor exosomes and polarization states of macrophages in a tumor microenvironemnt using a system of differential equations.
we modeled the nonlinear dynamics of macrophage polarization states m0m1m2 tumor cell killing by macrophages and evasion of macrophage mediated killing by tumor originated extracellular vesicle decoys.
solving these coupled differential equations using numerical approaches showed that the rate of macrophage polarization into the m1 state is the critical determinant of antitumor activity mediated by m1 polarized macrophages.
to determine what metabolomic factors correlate with the polarization of naive macrophage into antitumor m1 or protumor m2 phenotypes we performed lcmsbased untargeted metabolomic analysis.
statistical analysis using pythonscikitlearn was performed on the metabolomic data from naive m1 or m2 polarized murine macrophages followed by multiple feature selection methods.
application of ensemble machine learning methods to both secreted and cell associated metabolites revealed novel molecules of fatty acid metabolism to be the main mediators of polarization.
integration of ensemble machine learning featureranking tools into our analysis of metabolomic data identified new potential targets in macrophage metabolism for enhancing antitumor activities."
"dna extraction technology continues to evolve along with the need for a fast and simple process.
the dna extraction with magnetic nanoparticles accommodates these demands by providing a method that is safe simple and yet able to give good purity.
the purity parameter of the extracted dna is based on the a260280 value.
this metaanalysis aims to find variables that can affect the purity of extracted dna using magnetic nanoparticles based on its extraction and particle synthesis procedure.
the information to be analyzed is from dna extraction from human blood plasmid extraction and e. coli gdna extraction.
the research begins with a systematic review to collect appropriate studies and analysis will be carried out using minitab to find variables that affect the purity of dna either positive or negative.
here we show that no variables have been found significant to the purity of the extracted dna in both the dna extraction procedure steps and reagents.
for the magnetic nanoparticle synthesis method for extraction of"
"during manufacturing batches chinese hamster ovary cho cells encounter critical levels of environmental stressors such as ammonia lactate and osmolality accumulation that can significantly reduce cell health and productivity.
it is therefore crucial that stress adaptation and resistance be factored into cell line development cld.
in this study we employee populationbased transcriptomic and differential gene expression analysis on stressinduced cho cells to identify biomarkers displaying both heritable and stressresponsive properties.
using this workflow 199 genes displayed transcriptional variability characteristic of a bistable system that formed four network communities of cofluctuating genes.
these communities were enriched in genes related to the regulation of apoptotic processes and gene expressionmetabolic pathways.
seven genes were identified as promising biomarkers for engineering a stressresistant phenotype.
genetic engineering methods may be employed in the future to bias clonal populations for higher stress tolerance to manufacturing stress therefore increasing cell health and productivity in atscale bioreactors."
nrw and kds have filed intellectual property on the methodology discussed in this manuscript.
"the covid19 pandemic caused by the sarscov2 virus has resulted in significant global mortality and disruption.
despite extensive research the precise molecular mechanisms underlying sarscov2 replication remain unclear.
to address this we developed a singlemolecule forster resonance energy transfer smfret assay to directly visualize and analyse in vitro rna synthesis by the sarscov2 rnadependent rna polymerase rdrp.
we purified the minimal replication complex comprising nsp12 nsp7 and nsp8 and combined it with fluorescently labelled rna substrates enabling realtime monitoring of rna primer elongation at the singlemolecule level.
this platform allowed us to investigate the mechanisms of action of key inhibitors of sarscov2 replication.
in particular our data provides evidence for remdesivirs mechanism of action which involves polymerase stalling and subsequent chain termination dependent on the concentration of competing nucleotide triphosphates.
our study demonstrates the power of smfret to provide dynamic insights into sarscov2 replication offering a valuable tool for antiviral screening and mechanistic studies of viral rdrp activity."
"hydrogen peroxide h2o2 functions as a secondary messenger in cellular redox signaling acting mainly via oxidation of protein thiols.
its spatially and temporally regulated activity within cells is essential for maintaining proper redox balance and disruptions in these patterns can lead to oxidative stress and various related pathologies.
redox proteomics which examines the impact of h2o2 at the proteome level typically focuses only on thiol oxidation overlooking broader proteomic alterations and the significance of subcellular localization in these redox processes.
in this study we address these open questions by combining chemogenetics with thermal proteome profiling tpp to map global proteome response to compartmentalized h2o2 production.
we identified hundreds of proteins with altered thermostability andor abundance upon localized h2o2 generation in the cytosol nucleus and the er lumen highlighting their roles in cellular responses to localized h2o2.
we identified proteins such as map2k1 park7 trap1 and uba2 to be highly sensitive to localized h2o2 production.
furthermore we validated their altered thermostability and found that these changes are controlled via dysregulated proteinprotein interactions.
this study provides a valuable resource for researchers exploring redoxmediated signal transduction and offers novel insights that could be harnessed in treating oxidative stressinduced pathologies."
"eating less meat is associated with a healthier body and planet.
yet we remain reluctant to switch to a plantbased diet largely due to the sensory experience of plantbased meat.
food scientists characterize meat using a double compression test which only probes onedimensional behavior.
here we use tension compression and shear tests–combined with constitutive neural networks–to automatically discover the behavior of eight plantbased and animal meats across the entire threedimensional spectrum.
we find that plantbased sausage and hotdog with stiffnesses of 95.9±14.1kpa and 38.7±3.0kpa successfully mimic their animal counterparts with 63.5±45.7kpa and 44.3±13.2 kpa while tofurky is twice as stiff and tofu is twice as soft.
strikingly a complementary food tasting survey produces in nearly identical stiffness rankings for all eight products"
"anthropogenic actions have caused severe environmental changes leading to a rapid and massive loss of biodiversity called the holocene extinction or sixth extinction.
in this context integrative methods capable of quickly and reliably determining and differentiating species have become constantly demanded in taxonomic studies.
nearinfrared spectroscopical technologies have proved to be promising for application in the integrative taxonomy of insects and it is a truenondestructive method causing no damage to the sample and being completely chemicalpreparationfree.
nearinfrared spectral profiles are known as the fingerprints of the chemical composition of a given sample and a new layer of information may be accessed.
hyperspectral imaging technologies in the nearinfrared range are among the most popular although their usage is still incipient in insect studies.
as in other animal taxa katydids taxonomy has traditionally been based on morphological comparison resulting in many misclassifications over the years.
however integrative methods are more and more required in taxonomic studies.
different methods and technologies have been used from an integrative perspective to minimize misidentifications especially for nontaxonomist or untrained researchers.
here we approach the applicability of nearinfrared spectroscopy coupled with hyperspectral imaging technology to ensifera specimens housed in collections discussing the advantages disadvantages and challenges to future applications.
as a result we propose using only homologous body parts in comparing and modeling species using this kind of data due to the heterogeneity of the insects exoskeleton.
additionally we made a case study by discriminating four species of the katydid genus conocephalus thunberg one of the most speciose genera within orthoptera that is known to have polymorphic species with variations expressed in the wing development and postabdomen appendages.
we generated a partial least squaresdiscriminant analysis plsda classification model for the species with an overall classification accuracy for the assigned pixels of 90 and specific accuracy for pixel discrimination ranging from 96 to 98. this is one of the few research studies employing hyperspectral imaging in insects taxonomy and it is the very first to use this technology in orthoptera therefore this is a preliminary approach to usage as an integrative method."
"this study presents the first in vivo and in vitro evidence of an externally controlled predictive mribased nanotheranostic agent capable of cancer cell specific targeting and killing via irreversible electroporation ire in solid tumors.
the rectangularprismshaped magnetoelectric nanoparticle is a smart nanoparticle that produces a local electric field in response to an externally applied magnetic field.
when externally activated menps are preferentially attracted to the highly conductive cancer cell membranes which occurs in cancer cells because of dysregulated ion flux across their membranes.
in a pancreatic adenocarcinoma murine model menps activated by external magnetic fields during magnetic resonance imaging mri resulted in a mean threefold tumor volume reduction 62.3 vs 188.7 p  .001 from a single treatment.
in a longitudinal confirmatory study 35 of mice treated with activated menps achieved a durable complete response for 14 weeks after one treatment.
the degree of tumor volume reduction correlated with a decrease in mri t2 relaxation time r  .351 p  .039 which suggests that menps have a potential to serve as a predictive nanotheranostic agent at time of treatment.
there were no discernable toxicities associated with menps at any timepoint or on histopathological analysis of major organs.
menps are a noninvasive alternative modality for the treatment of cancer."
"eagle rays cownose rays and manta rays family myliobatidae have a slender tail that can be longer than the animal’s body length but its function and structure are unknown.
using histology immunohistochemistry and 3d imaging with microct scans we describe the anatomy and function of the tail in  the cownose ray.
the tail is an extension of the vertebral column with unique morphological specializations.
along the tail behind the barb vertebral centra are absent and neural and hemal arches fuse and form a solid mineralized structure that we term the caudal synarcual which imparts passive stiffness to the tail reducing bending.
two lateral line canals connected to an extensive tubule network extend along both sides of the tail.
tubules branch from the lateral line canal toward the dorsal and ventral tail surfaces and open to the surrounding water via pores.
a continuous neuromast is located within each lateral line canal maintaining an interrupted structure along the entire tail.
the complex lateral line mechanosensory system in the tail of"
"background
bacillus methanolicus is the next workhorse in biotechnology using methanol an alternative and economical onecarbon feedstock that can be obtained directly from carbon dioxide as both carbon and energy source for the production of various valueadded chemicals.
the wildtype strain b. methanolicus mga3 naturally overproduces lglutamate in methanolbased fedbatch fermentations.
results
here we generated by induced mutagenesis an evolved b. methanolicus strain exhibiting enhanced lglutamate production capability 150. to showcase the potential of this evolved strain further metabolic engineering enabled the production of γaminobutyric acid gaba directly from lglutamate with a yield of 13.2 gl from methanol during fedbatch fermentations.
by using a systemslevel analysis encompassing wholegenome sequencing rna sequencing fluxome analysis and genomescale metabolic modelling we were able to elucidate the metabolic and regulatory adaptations that sustain the biosynthesis of these products.
the metabolism of the mutant strain evolved to prioritize energy conservation and efficient carbon utilization.
key metabolic shifts include the downregulation of energyintensive processes such as flagellation and motility and the rerouting of carbon fluxes towards αketoglutarate and its derivative lglutamate.
moreover we observed that transformation of the evolved strain with a gaba biosynthesis plasmid had a positive effect on lglutamate production likely due to an upregulation of various transaminases involved in the lglutamate biosynthesis from αketoglutarate.
conclusions
these results and insights provide a foundation for further rational metabolic engineering and bioprocess optimization enhancing the industrial viability of b. methanolicus for sustainable production of lglutamate and its derivatives."
"microbes can be engineered to detect target chemicals but when they operate in realworld environments it remains unclear how competition with natural microbes affect their performance over long time periods.
we engineered sensors and memorystoring genetic circuits inside  to sense and respond to the tnt explosive using predictive models for rational design.
we characterized their ability to detect tnt in a natural soil system measuring singlecell and populationlevel behavior over a 28day period.
the autonomous microbial sensor activated its response by 14fold when exposed to low tnt concentrations and maintained stable activation for over 21 days exhibiting exponential decay dynamics at the populationlevel with a halflife of about 5 days.
our results show that engineered soil bacteria can carry out longterm detection of an important chemical in natural soil with competitive growth dynamics serving as additional biocontainment."
"for effective treatment of bacterial infections it is essential to identify the species causing the infection as early as possible.
currently the main techniques for determining the species require hours of overnight culturing of a bacterial sample and a larger quantity of cells to function effectively.
this study uses onehour phasecontrast timelapses of bacterial growth collected from a microfluidic chip also known as a mother machine.
then this data is used to train deep artificial neural networks to identify the species.
both video and image classification models of the vision transformer vit and convolutional neural network cnn families were evaluated in this study.
we have previously demonstrated this approach to classify four different species which is now extended to seven species  and"
"many interactions in microbial consortia or tissues of multicellular organisms rely on networks of metabolite exchanges.
to predict community function and composition beyond statistical correlations one can use genomescale metabolic models.
however comprehensive model analysis via metabolic pathways is a major challenge because pathway counts grow combinatorially with model size.
here we define minimal pathways that yield compact representations of metabolic network capabilities.
they generalize existing pathway concepts by allowing inhomogeneous constraints and targeted analysis of subnetworks and we show how to enumerate and sample them efficiently via iterative minimization and pathway graphs.
this enables applications such as assessing quantitative gene essentiality in the central metabolism of"
effective treatment of pediatric acute leukemia is dependent on accurate genomic classification typically derived from a combination of multiple timeconsuming and costly techniques such as flow cytometry fluorescence
"mitophagy is crucial for maintaining mitochondrial health but how its levels adjust to different stress conditions remains unclear.
in this study we investigated the role of the dele1hri axis of integrated stress response isr in regulating mitophagy a key mitochondrial stress pathway.
our findings show that the isr suppresses mitophagy under nondepolarizing mitochondrial stress by positively regulating mitochondrial protein import independent of atf4 activation.
mitochondrial protein import is regulated by the rate of protein synthesis under both depolarizing and nondepolarizing stress.
without isr increased protein synthesis overwhelms the mitochondrial import machinery reducing its efficiency.
under depolarizing stress mitochondrial import is heavily impaired even with active isr leading to significant pink1 accumulation.
in contrast nondepolarizing stress allows more efficient protein import in the presence of isr resulting in lower mitophagy.
without isr mitochondrial protein import becomes severely compromised causing pink1 accumulation to reach the threshold necessary to trigger mitophagy.
these findings reveal a novel link between isrregulated protein synthesis mitochondrial import and mitophagy offering potential therapeutic targets for diseases associated with mitochondrial dysfunction."
"desmosomes are transmembrane protein complexes that contribute to cellcell adhesion in epithelia and other tissues.
here we report the discovery of frequent genetic alterations in the desmosome in human cancers with the strongest signal seen in cutaneous melanoma where desmosomes are mutated in 70 of cases.
in primary but not metastatic melanoma biopsies the burden of coding mutations in desmosome genes associates with a strong reduction in desmosome gene expression.
analysis by spatial transcriptomics and protein immunofluorescence suggests that these expression decreases occur in keratinocytes in the microenvironment rather than in primary melanoma cells.
in further support of a microenvironmental origin we find that desmosome gene knockdown in keratinocytes yields markedly increased proliferation of adjacent melanoma cells in keratinocytemelanoma cocultures.
similar increases in melanoma proliferation are observed in media preconditioned by desmosomedeficient keratinocytes.
thus gradual accumulation of desmosome mutations in neighboring cells may prime melanoma cells for neoplastic transformation."
"antimicrobial resistance amr is escalating globally at an alarming rate posing a severe threat to public health and modern medicine.
a substantial strategy to combat amr and ensure safe and efficient antimicrobial therapies in the future is the development of antimicrobial agents based on novel scaffolds exerting an innovative mode of action.
the antibacterial class of cystobactamids natural products targeting the bacterial gyrase and topoisomerase iv have such a novel scaffold and their synthetic derivatives exhibit broadspectrum antibiotic activity.
herein as part of our derisking strategy we set out to study and characterize potential biological effects on eukaryotic cells.
a comprehensive toxicological in vitro profiling focusing on general cytotoxicity genotoxicity and mitochondrial toxicity is provided along with in vivo experiments to characterize potential developmental cardio and hepatotoxicity in zebrafish embryos.
results from these investigations support good safety and a presumably high therapeutic index of cystobactamids even suggesting potential protective properties against oxidative cell stress.
furthermore in vitro metabolism studies unveiled glucuronidation and amide bond hydrolysis as the main pathways of biotransformation in hepatocytes.
metabolic stability of cystobactamids was substantially improved by cotreatment with the cyp3aoatp1b inhibitor cobicistat.
in addition eukaryotic offtargets of cystobactamids were studied on the molecular level employing affinitybased protein profiling and revealing scavenger receptor class b member 1 scarb1 as primary eukaryotic target protein.
indeed functional inhibition of scarb1 by cystobactamids was shown and effectively prevented hepatitis c virus pseudoparticles hcvpp from cell entry thus confirming scarb1 inhibition as novel target of the class."
"the dissemination of mobile antibiotic resistance genes args via horizontal gene transfer is a significant threat to public health globally.
the flow of args into and between pathogens however remains poorly understood limiting our ability to develop strategies for managing the antibiotic resistance crisis.
therefore we aimed to identify genetic and ecological factors that are fundamental for successful horizontal arg transfer.
from the analysis of 1 million bacterial genomes and 20000 metagenomes we developed random forest models that could reliably predict horizontal arg transfer between bacteria.
our results suggest that genetic incompatibility measured as nucleotide composition dissimilarity negatively influences the likelihood of transfer of args between evolutionarily divergent bacteria.
conversely environmental cooccurrence increased the likelihood especially in humans and wastewater in which several environmentspecific dissemination patterns were observed.
this study provides new ways to predict the spread of args and provides new insights into the mechanisms governing this evolutionary process."
"gout is a prevalent form of inflammatory arthritis that occurs due to high levels of uric acid in the blood leading to the formation of urate crystals in and around the joints particularly affecting the elderly.
recent research has provided evidence of distinct differences in the gut microbiota of patients with gout and hyperuricemia when compared to healthy individuals.
however the link between gut microbiota and agerelated gout remained underexplored.
our study found that gut microbiota plays a crucial role in determining susceptibility to agerelated gout.
specifically we observed that agerelated gut microbiota regulated the activation of the nlrp3 inflammasome pathway and modulated uric acid metabolism.
more scrutiny highlighted the positive impact of younger microbiota on the gut microbiota structure of old or aged mice enhancing butanoate metabolism and butyric acid content.
experimentation with butyrate supplementation indicated that butyric acid exerts a dual effect inhibiting inflammation in acute gout and reducing serum uric acid levels.
these insights emphasize the potential of gut microbiome rejuvenation in mitigating senile gout unraveling the intricate dynamics between microbiota aging and gout.
it potentially serves as a therapeutic target for senile goutrelated conditions."
"radioimmunotherapy rit has proved clinically effective in the treatment of relapsed or consolidating nhl after chemotherapy.
however it is still at the clinical trial stage for the treatment of solid tumors.
the efficacy of the treatment on this type of tumor is limited by hematological toxicity which restricts the activities injected.
pretargeted radioimmunotherapy prit enables radiolabeling to be carried out in vivo at a time when the quantities of antigentargeted vector reach a maximum level in the tumor but have largely decayed in the bloodstream thus limiting hematological toxicity.
this therapeutic approach would make it possible to use higher radiopharmaceutical activities than those used in rit thereby increasing the doses deposited in the tumor and the therapeutic response.
despite encouraging preclinical trials this approach has failed to live up to expectations in terms of clinical applications.
in the context of prit using the inverse electron demand diels alder iedda reaction as a method for radiolabeling tumortargeted vectors a major research effort has been made to improve the quality of in vivo radiolabeling using tetrazine tz and transcycloctene tco variants whose stability and reactivity have been optimized.
most trials in this field have been carried out using antibodies which thanks to their long biological halflife enable prolonged irradiation of tumors.
lowmolecularweight vectors such as affinity proteins or antigenspecific antibody fragments vhhscfv fab  have the advantage of being rapidly eliminated from circulation by renal filtration but on the other hand the quantities and residence times of these vectors in the tumor are reduced compared with igg.
fab2 antibody fragments have properties intermediate between those of igg and lowmolecularweight vectors that could be suitable for prit approaches but they have not yet been evaluated in prit using iedda.
in preparation for a preclinical trial of radioimmunotherapy of triplenegative breast cancer in spontaneously affected dogs we compared the biodistribution of igg and its fab2 fragment targeting canine cd138 in a xenogeneic model of canine breast cancer and in a mouse model of colon cancer expressing human ace antigen.
this analysis shows that the use of fab2 fragments improves the therapeutic index compared with igg.
fab2 fragments seem particularly well suited to tumor targeting in prit using shortlived isotopes such as 211at."
west nile virus wnv a member of the
"the genome in a bottle consortium giab hosted by the national institute of standards and technology nist is developing new matched tumornormal samples the first to be explicitly consented for public dissemination of genomic data and cell lines.
here we describe a comprehensive genomic dataset from the first individual hg008 including dna from an adherent epitheliallike pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma pdac tumor cell line hg008t and matched normal cells from duodenal tissue hg008nd and pancreatic tissue hg008np.
the data come from thirteen whole genome measurement technologies illumina pairedend element standard and long insert ultima ug100 pacbio hifi and onso oxford nanopore standard and ultralong bionano optical mapping arima and phase genomics hic gbanded karyotyping directional genomic hybridization and bioskryb genomics singlecell resolvedna.
most tumor data is from a large homogenous batch of nonviable cells after 23 passages of the primary tumor cells along with some data from different passages to enable an initial understanding of genomic instability.
these data will be used by the giab consortium to develop matched tumornormal benchmarks for somatic variant detection.
in addition extensive data from two different normal tissues from the same individual can enable understanding of mosaicism.
long reads also contain methylation tags for epigenetic analyses.
we expect these data to facilitate innovation for whole genome measurement technologies de novo assembly of tumor and normal genomes and bioinformatic tools to identify small and structural somatic mutations.
this firstofitskind broadly consented openaccess resource will facilitate further understanding of sequencing methods used for cancer biology."
"tumor hypoxia induced alterations in the epigenetic landscape and alternative splicing influence cellular adaptations.
prmt5 is a type ii protein arginine methyltransferase that regulates several tumorigenic events in many cancer types.
however the regulation of prmt5 and its direct implication on aberrant alternative splicing under hypoxia remains unexplored.
in this study we observed hypoxia induced upregulation of prmt5 via the ccctc binding factor ctcf.
further prmt5mediated symmetric arginine dimethylation h4r3me2s and h3r8me2s directly regulated the alternative splicing of transcription factor 3 tcf3.
under hypoxia prmt5mediated histone dimethylation at the intronic conserved region icr present between tcf3 exon 18a and exon 18b recruits dna methyltransferase 3a dnmt3a resulting in dna methylation.
dna methylation at the tcf3icr is recognized and bound by methyl cpg binding protein mecp2 resulting in rnapol ii pausing promoting the recruitment of the negative splicing factor ptbp1 to the splicing locus of tcf3 mrna.
ptbp1 promotes the exclusion of exon 18a which results in the production of the proinvasive tcf318b e47 isoform which promotes emt and invasion of breast cancer cells under hypoxia.
collectively our results indicate prmt5mediated symmetric arginine dimethylation of histones regulates alternative splicing of tcf3 gene thereby enhancing emt and invasion in breast cancer hypoxia."
"tumor endothelial tecs cells play a critical role in regulating immune responses within the tumor microenvironment tme.
however the mechanisms by which tecs modulate immune cell population remain unclear particularly in nonsmall cell lung cancer nsclc.
here we investigated how nsclc cells tweak normal endothelial cells necs into tecs and the subsequent effects on immune regulation.
necs were cocultured with various nsclc cell lines using 2d and 3d coculture models to evaluate tecmediated effects on immune cells.
we show that direct coculture led to significant transcriptomic proteomic and kinomic alterations in tecs especially in proinflammatory pathways.
we identified a downregulation of the costimulatory molecule ox40l in tecs compared to necs suggesting impaired tcell proliferation support.
while tecs showed a limited effect on cd8 tcell activation tecs supported cd4 tcells polarization into treg and th22 subsets.
moreover tecs also promoted m2like macrophages polarization thereby potentially contributing to the tme immunosuppression.
stateoftheart singlecell rna sequencing of 3d multicellular tumor spheroids mcts revealed distinct tec subpopulations including an inflammatory subset with upr signature.
the latter was absent in 2dcultured necs but present in freshly isolated and 2dcultured tecs from nsclc patients.
importantly we also identified within mcts a perivascular m2like macrophage subset predicted to interact with tecs with mif and midkine signaling.
in conclusion tecs in nsclc tumors play a pivotal role in remodeling the tme immune landscape by promoting immune suppression.
this study highlights the complex immunoregulatory functions of tecs within our different in vitro models that mimic aspects of the tme.
our data may provide new insights into potential therapeutic strategies targeting tecs or regulatory signaling to improve the efficacy of immunotherapy in nsclc."
"micrornas modulate most proteincoding genes and many are regulated during maturation.
chemical modifications of primary transcripts containing micrornas have been implicated in altering microprocessor processing efficiency a key initiating endonucleolytic step performed by drosha and dgcr8.
mettl3mettl14 produces n6methyladenosine which is the most common methylation for mrnas.
genetic experiments suggested that mettl3mettl14 promotes primary microrna processing by microprocessor but the molecular mechanism still needs to be elucidated.
we tested the hypothesis that mettl3mettl14 or m6a may directly impact drosha or dgcr8 function during primary microrna processing.
after reconstituting the methyltransferase and processing activities we show that the presence of mettl3mettl14 complexes does not affect the processing efficiency of droshadgcr8.
we also established a method to prepare m6amodified primary micrornas and used them to show that the processing of the transcripts with m6a is similar to those without any modification.
recombinant mettl3mettl14 and dgcr8 do not form stable complexes challenging the previous model that depends on enhanced dgcr8 recruitment.
therefore mettl3mettl14 or m6a modification does not generally promote microprocessormediated microrna processing although they may impact certain cases."
"the search for new approaches in cancer therapy requires a mechanistic understanding of cancer vulnerabilities and anticancer drug mechanisms of action.
problematically some effective therapeutics target cancer vulnerabilities that have poorly defined mechanisms of anticancer activity.
one such drug is decitabine a frontline therapeutic approved for the treatment of highrisk acute myeloid leukemia aml.
decitabine is thought to kill cancer cells selectively via inhibition of dna methyltransferase enzymes but the genes and mechanisms involved remain unclear.
here we apply an integrated multiomics and crispr functional genomics approach to identify genes and processes associated with response to decitabine in aml cells.
our integrated multiomics approach reveals rna dynamics are key regulators of dna hypomethylation induced cell death.
specifically regulation of rna decapping splicing and rna methylation emerge as critical regulators of cellular response to decitabine."
"oil contamination is an environmental issue worldwide and bioremediation has emerged as a preferred strategy to address this challenge.
one of the limiting factors in oil biodegradation is its bioavailability which can be solved by the addition of tensioactive compounds.
given the increasing demand for environmentally friendly surfactants this study aimed to obtain cellfree biosurfactant extracts as additives in surfactant enhanced remediation ser protocols.
dieseldegrading surfactantproducing strains were isolated to obtain biosurfactant extracts with minimal postproduction purification cost.
the most promising extracts were tested for ser assays using dieselcontaminated microcosms.
one of these showed a significant enhancement in diesel degradation compared with the controls.
this extract was obtained from a"
"melioidosis also known as whitmores disease is caused by the deadly pathogen burkholderia pseudomallei and remains a significant global health concern particularly in south asia.
the disease is contracted through exposure to contaminated soil water air and food.
infected individuals often present with abscesses in internal organs such as the lungs spleen and liver and in soft tissues with severe cases leading to septic shock and acute pneumonia.
the rising incidence and mortality rates coupled with b. pseudomalleis ability to form biofilms and develop resistance to antibiotics like cephalosporins make treatment increasingly challenging.
this highlights the urgent need for novel therapeutic approaches.dalaninedalanine ligase ddl a crucial enzyme involved in the final stage of bacterial cell wall synthesis which protects the pathogen from the hostile cellular environment of the host.
while many bacteria have two isoforms of this enzyme b. pseudomallei possesses only the ddlb isoform presenting a significant vulnerability.
our study represents the first successful attempt to target ddlb through a combination of molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations.
these investigations provide strong evidence that conivaptan acts as an effective inhibitor of ddlb offering a novel therapeutic approach for combating melioidosis."
"environmental metagenomic sampling is instrumental in preparing for future pandemics by enabling early identification of potential pathogens and timely intervention strategies.
novel pathogens are a major concern especially for zoonotic events.
however discovering novel pathogens often requires genome assembly which remains a significant bottleneck.
a robust metagenomic sampling that is directly searchable with new infection samples would give us a realtime understanding of outbreak origins dynamics.
in this study we propose partial read matching with inexpensive kmers parmik which is a search tool for efficiently identifying similar sequences from a patient sample query to a metagenomic sample read.
for example at 90 identity between a query and a read parmik surpassed blast providing up to 21 higher recall.
by filtering highly frequent kmers we reduced parmiks index size by over 50. moreover parmik identified longer alignments faster than blast peaking at 1.57x when parallelizing across 32 cores."
"oligonucleotides or gene fragments can be ligated in a specified order to create longer dna assemblies.
we present a method where dna symbols or oligos designed to encode information for data storage are joined to linker sequences at either end.
these linkers dictate the assembly order of the symbols the order of the symbols can be changed by changing the sequences of the linkers attached to them.
utilizing a ligating dnazyme as a catalytic splint we achieve roomtemperature enzymefree assembly offering a costeffective alternative to traditional enzymebased ligation methods.
we demonstrate this technique by assembling three different fivesymbol constructs with the order of the symbols determined by their linking ends.
this linker directed assembly technique allows dataencoding symbols to be assembled in any desired order.
furthermore the dnazymebased assembly method is versatile and can be applied to various dna assembly applications particularly where costeffectiveness and efficient roomtemperature ligation are required."
"people use the mechanical interplay between stability and manoeuvrability to successfully walk.
during single limb support body states position and velocity that increase lateral stability will inherently resist lateral manoeuvres decrease medial stability and facilitate medial manoeuvres.
although not well understood people can make behavioural decisions exploiting this relationship in anticipation of perturbations or direction changes.
to characterize the behavioural component of the stabilitymanoeuvrability relationship twentyfour participants performed many repetitions of a discrete stepping task involving midtrial reactive manoeuvres medial or lateral direction in a baseline no external perturbations and perturbed random mediolateral perturbations applied to their pelvis environment.
we hypothesized people would make systematic changes in lateral stability dependent on both environment increasing lateral stability in the perturbed environment and anticipated manoeuvre direction reducing lateral stability to facilitate lateral manoeuvres.
participants increased lateral stability in the perturbed environment coinciding with an increase in manoeuvre reaction time for laterally but not medially directed manoeuvres.
moreover we observed lower lateral stability in both environments when people anticipated making a lateral manoeuvre when compared to medial manoeuvres.
these results support the hypothesis that people behaviourally exploit the mechanical relationship between lateral stability and manoeuvrability depending on walk task goals and external environment."
"molecular detection of  infection has revealed large numbers of individuals with lowdensity yet transmissible infections undetectable by microscopy.
here we present an updated systematic review of crosssectional malaria surveys to explore the prevalence and drivers of these submicroscopic infections and define where they are likely to be relevant to malaria control efforts.
our results show that submicroscopic infections predominate in low transmission settings but also reveal marked geographical variation in their prevalence being highest in south american surveys and lowest in west african studies.
whilst current transmission levels partly explain these results we find that historical transmission intensity also represents a crucial determinant of the size of the submicroscopic reservoir.
submicroscopic infection was more likely in adults than children although we did not observe a statistically significant influence of seasonality.
our results suggest that the contribution of submicroscopic infections to transmission likely varies substantially across settings potentially warranting different approaches to their targeting in the approach to elimination."
"learning and memory are thought to be essential for our individual uniqueness and sense of self .
yet individuality is rarely studied in the context of behaviors that depend on learning.
while it is established that such behaviors can vary across individuals it remains unknown whether their variation stems from learning or from classical sources of individuality the developmental stochasticity environment and genetics"
"nanopore direct rna sequencing drs advances rna biology but is limited by relatively low basecalling accuracy low throughput yet high rna input and costs.
here we introduce a novel drs toolkit deminers which integrates an rna multiplexing experimental workflow a machinelearning barcode classifier based on random forest and a novel basecaller built on an optimized convolutional neural network providing an additional speciesspecific training module.
with the increased accuracy in barcode classification and basecalling deminers can demultiplex up to 24 samples and the required rna input and running time are both substantially reduced.
we demonstrated the applications of deminers in clinical metagenomics cancer transcriptomics and parallel comparison of transcriptomic features in different biological conditions revealing altered airway microbial diversity in covid19 and a potential role of m6a in increasing transcriptomic diversity in glioma and the mature bloodstage of malaria parasites.
overall deminers is a simple robust highthroughput drs method for accurately estimating transcript levels polya lengths and mutation and rna modification heterogeneity at singleread level with minimal sequencing biases."
"climate change and globalization are accelerating biological invasions highlighting the urgent need to understand adaptation mechanisms in invaded environments to improve management strategies.
genomic data can provide insights into the adaptation of invasive species through genotypeenvironment association gea studies identifying genes and biological processes associated with invasion success and more globally to estimate genetic maladaptation to new environments by calculating genomic offset go statistics.
in this study we investigate genetic adaptation in the invasive crop pest"
"hiv1 infection requires lifelong therapy with antiretroviral drugs due to the existence of a latent reservoir of transcriptionally inactive integrated proviruses.
the goal of hiv1 cure research is to eliminate or functionally silence this reservoir.
to this end there are numerous ongoing studies to evaluate immunologic approaches including monoclonal antibody therapies.
evaluating the results of these studies requires sensitive and specific measures of the reservoir.
here we describe a relatively high throughput combined quantitative polymerase chain reaction qpcr and next generation sequencing method.
four different qpcr probes covering the packaging signal"
"although placental mammals are at high risk of maternalfetal immune conflict it is unclear how the semiallogeneic fetus avoids rejection.
cholesterol sulfate cs is a bioactive metabolite that inhibits leukocyte migration and activation.
this study investigated the roles and cells associated with cs in pregnant mice and humans.
cs was sequentially produced by maternalderived endometrial cells and fetalderived placental trophoblasts before and after placentation.
when mated with allogeneic males csdeficient mice showed increased fetal resorption rates under induced placental inflammation.
this phenotype disappeared when the activity of the csproducing enzyme was restored in the placenta.
placental cs levels were reduced in patients with villitis of unknown etiology.
thus we uncovered the spatiotemporal control of cs production and its relevance to local immunosuppression during pregnancy."
"smallmolecule rna binders have emerged as an important pharmacological modality.
a profound understanding of the ligand selectivity binding mode and influential factors governing ligand engagement with rna targets is the foundation for rational ligand design.
here we report a novel class of coumarin derivatives exhibiting selective binding affinity towards single g rna bulges.
harnessing the computational power of allatom gaussian accelerated molecular dynamics gamd simulations we unveiled a rare minor groove binding mode of the ligand with a key interaction between the coumarin moiety and the g bulge.
this predicted binding mode is consistent with results obtained from structureactivityrelationship sar studies and transverse relaxation measurements by nmr spectroscopy.
we further generated 444 molecular descriptors from 69 coumarin derivatives and identified key contributors to the binding events such as charge state and planarity by lasso least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression.
strikingly small structure perturbations on these key contributors such as the addition of a methyl group that disrupts the planarity of the ligand resulted in  100fold reduction in the binding affinity.
our work deepened the understanding of rnasmall molecule interactions and integrated a new generalizable platform for the rational design of selective smallmolecule rna binders."
"the texture of meat is one of the most important features to mimic when developing meat analogs.
both protein source and processing method impact the texture of the final product.
we can distinguish three types of mechanical tests to quantify the textural differences between meat and meat analogs puncturetype rheological torsion tests and classical mechanical tests of tension compression and bending.
here we compile the shear force and stiffness values of whole and comminuted meats and meat analogs from the two most popular tests for meat the warnerbratzler shear test and the doublecompression texture profile analysis.
our results suggest that with the right finetuning todays meat analogs are well capable of mimicking the mechanics of real meat.
while warnerbratzler shear tests and texture profile analysis provide valuable information about the tenderness and sensory perception of meat both tests suffer from a lack of standardization which limits crossstudy comparisons.
here we provide guidelines to standardize meat testing and report the meat stiffness as the single most informative mechanical parameter.
collecting big standardized data and sharing them with the community at large could empower researchers to harness the power of generative artificial intelligence to inform the systematic development of meat analogs with desired mechanical properties and functions taste and sensory perception."
"the sarscov2 main protease mpro or nsp5 is critical for the production of functional viral proteins during infection and like many viral proteases can also target host proteins to subvert their cellular functions.
here we show that the human trna methyltransferase trmt1 can be recognized and cleaved by sarscov2 mpro.
trmt1 installs the n2n2dimethylguanosine m22g modification on mammalian trnas which promotes global protein synthesis and cellular redox homeostasis.
we find that mpro can cleave endogenous trmt1 in human cell lysate resulting in removal of the trmt1 zinc finger domain.
trmt1 proteolysis results in elimination of trmt1 trna methyltransferase activity and reduced trna binding affinity.
evolutionary analysis shows that the trmt1 cleavage site is highly conserved in mammals except in muroidea where trmt1 is likely resistant to cleavage.
in primates regions outside the cleavage site with rapid evolution could indicate adaptation to ancient viral pathogens.
furthermore we determined the structure of a trmt1 peptide in complex with mpro revealing a substrate binding conformation distinct from the majority of available mpropeptide complexes.
kinetic parameters for peptide cleavage show that the trmt1526536 sequence is cleaved with comparable efficiency to the mprotargeted nsp89 viral cleavage site.
mutagenesis studies and molecular dynamics simulations together indicate that kinetic discrimination occurs during a later step of mpromediated proteolysis that follows substrate binding.
our results provide new information about the structural basis for mpro substrate recognition and cleavage the functional roles of the trmt1 zinc finger domain in trna binding and modification and the regulation of trmt1 activity by sarscov2 mpro.
these studies could inform future therapeutic design targeting mpro and raise the possibility that proteolysis of human trmt1 during sarscov2 infection suppresses protein translation and oxidative stress response to impact viral pathogenesis."
"to combat antimicrobial resistant pathogens natural predatory bacteria like bdellovibrio bacteriovorus represent potential alternatives.
b. bacteriovorus could be particularly potent as it kills a broad range of human bacterial pathogens however it remains unclear whether prey can evolve geneticallydetermined resistance against predation.
here we show that the model bacterium escherichia coli k12 consistently evolves resistance against b. bacteriovorus during experimental evolution.
selection for resistance scaled positively with predation pressure and was widespread after two cycles of predator exposure.
like antibiotics predation resistance was costly manifesting in a tradeoff between predation resistance and fitness in the absence of predators.
genetic analysis identified changes in outer membrane porin ompf as common resistance mechanism while a mutation in cell envelope lipopolysaccharidemodifying enzyme waaf was rarer but also conferred predation resistance.
our study uncovers evolutionary and mechanistic aspects of prey escape from predation generating important knowledge on predatorprey interactions and to advance sustainable treatments."
"in recent years we have seen a significant increase in our understanding of the mechanisms of development regeneration and healing of the respiratory system.
however most of these studies have been limited by their focus on mammalian systems.
here we aimed to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms that are active during lung growth and tissue repair in amphibians specifically xenopus tropicalis"
"widefield fluorescence microscopy through axial scanning provides a simple way for volumetric imaging of cellular and intracellular activities but the optical transfer function otf of widefield microscopy suffers from axial frequency deficiencies leading to strong interference from outoffocus fluorescence signals and reduced imaging quality.
richardsonlucy rl deconvolution and its variants are commonly employed to reduce interplane signal interference of widefield microscopy.
however these methods are still affected by the missing cone issue inherent in the otf compromising both the axial resolution and optical sectioning capability.
existing deep learning methods could realize highfidelity 3d image stack restoration but relying on highquality paired datasets or specific assumptions about sample distributions.
here we propose a novel method named physicsinformed ellipsoidal coordinate encoding implicit neural representation pieceinr to tackle the challenges of background signal interference and resolution loss in axial scanning image stacks using the widefield microscopy.
in pieceinr we integrate the widefield fluorescence imaging model with the selfsupervised inr network for highfidelity reconstruction of 3d fluorescence data without the need of additional ground truth data for training.
we further design a novel ellipsoidal coordinate encoding based on the systems otf constraints and incorporate implicit priors derived from the physical model as the loss function into the reconstruction process.
our approach enables blockwise reconstruction of largescale images by using localized physical information.
we demonstrate stateoftheart performance of our pieceinr method in volumetric imaging of live hela cells largevolume c. elegans wholeembryo and mitochondrial dynamics."
"lipids represent the most diverse pool of metabolites found in cells facilitating compartmentation signaling and other functions.
dysregulation of lipid metabolism is linked to disease states such as cancer and neurodegeneration.
however limited tools are available for quantifying metabolic fluxes across the lipidome.
to directly measure reaction fluxes encompassing compound lipid homeostasis we applied stable isotope tracing highresolution mass spectrometry and networkbased isotopologue modeling to nonsmall cell lung cancer nsclc models.
compound lipid metabolic flux analysis clmfa enables the concurrent quantitation of fatty acid synthesis elongation headgroup assembly and salvage reactions within virtually any biological system.
here we resolve liver kinase b1 lkb1mediated regulation of sphingolipid recycling in nsclc cells and precisioncut lung slice cultures.
we also demonstrate that widely used tissue culture conditions drive cells to upregulate fatty acid synthase flux to supraphysiological levels.
finally we identify previously uncharacterized isozyme specificity of ceramide synthase inhibitors highlighting the molecular detail revealed by clmfa."
"amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 4 als4 is an autosomal dominant motor neuron disease that is molecularly characterized by reduced rloop levels and caused by pathogenic variants in  .
encodes an rnadna helicase that resolves threestranded nucleic acid structures called rloops.
currently there are no diseasemodifying therapies available for als4.
given that  is haplosufficient removing the product of the mutated allele presents a potential therapeutic strategy.
we designed a series of sirnas to selectively target the rna transcript from the als4 allele containing the c.1166tc mutation p.leu389ser.
transfection of hek293 cells with sirna and plasmids encoding either wildtype or mutant leu389ser epitope tagged setx revealed that three sirnas specifically reduced mutant setx protein levels without affecting the wildtype setx protein.
in als4 primary fibroblasts sirna treatment silenced the endogenous mutant  allele while sparing the wildtype allele and restored rloop levels in patient cells.
our findings demonstrate that mutant"
"embryonic stem cell research has uncovered different requirements for wntβcatenin signalling in human naïve pluripotent cells compared to the mouse paradigm.
it is therefore important to study wntβcatenin signalling directly in models of early human development.
since tcflef factors mediate the regulation of target genes downstream of wntβcatenin signalling we studied the expression and protein localisation of the four tcflef genes by analysing  “snapshots” of human development leveraging naïve and primed pluripotent cells as well as extraembryonic and early embryonic cell lineages.
strikingly we comprehensively confirm clear differences between mouse and human pluripotent stem cells suggesting speciesspecific requirements for wnt signalling that may reflect differences in states of pluripotency.
human naïve es cells express very low tcf7l1 unlike their mouse counterparts.
tcf7l2 is robustly expressed in human naïve esderived trophectoderm cells.
in human primed pluripotent stem cells activation of wntβcatenin signalling is required to induce expression of both  and  concomitant with hallmark gastrulation markers.
this expression of human tcflef genes benchmarks differential requirements for wntβcatenin signalling throughout early human embryo development that requires further investigation."
"allorecognition in botryllus schlosseri is controlled by a highly polymorphic locus the fuhc and functionally similar to missingself recognition utilized by natural killer cells compatibility is determined by sharing a selfallele and integration of activating and inhibitory signals determines outcome.
we had found these signals were generated by two fuhcencoded receptors called fester and uncle fester.
here we show that fester genes are members of an extended family consisting of 37 loci and coexpressed with an even more diverse gene family the fester coreceptors fcor.
the fcors are membrane proteins related to fester but include conserved tyrosine motifs including itims and hemitams.
both genes are encoded in highly polymorphic haplotypes on multiple chromosomes revealing an unparalleled level of diversity of innate receptors.
our results also suggest that itamitim signal integration is a deeply conserved mechanism that has allowed convergent evolution of innate and adaptive cellbased recognition systems."
"objective
the presence of autoantibodies to citrullinated protein antigens acpas in the absence of clinicallyapparent inflammatory arthritis ia identifies individuals atrisk for developing future clinical rheumatoid arthritis ra.
however it is unclear why some acpa individuals convert to clinical ra while others do not.
we explored the possibility in the targeting immune responses for prevention of rheumatoid arthritis tipra study that epigenetic remodeling is part of the trajectory from an atrisk state to clinical disease and identifies novel biomarkers associated with conversion to clinical ra.
methods
acpa controls acpa atrisk and early ra individuals were followed for up to 5 years including obtaining blood samples annually and at ra diagnosis.
peripheral blood mononuclear cells pbmcs were separated into cd19 b cells memory cd4 t cells and naive cd4 t cells using antibodies and magnetic beads.
genomewide methylation within each cell lineage was assayed using the illumina methylationepic v1.0 beadchip.
acpa atrisk participants who did or did not develop ra were designated prera or nonconverters respectively.
differentially methylated loci dml were selected using the limma software package.
using the caret package we constructed machine learning models in test and validation cohorts and identified the most predictive loci of clinical ra conversion.
results
crosssectional differential methylation analysis at baseline revealed dmls that distinguish the prera methylome from acpa nonconverters the latter which closely resembled acpa controls.
genes overlapping these dmls correspond to aberrant notch signaling and dna repair pathways in b cells.
longitudinal analysis showed that acpa control and acpa nonconverter methylomes are relatively constant.
in contrast the prera methylome remodeled along a dynamic ra methylome trajectory characterized by epigenetic changes in active regulatory elements.
clinical conversion to ra defined based on diagnosis marked an epigenetic inflection point for cell cycle pathways in b cells and adaptive immunity pathways in naive t cells.
machine learning revealed individual loci associated with ra conversion.
this model significantly outperformed autoantibodies plus acute phase reactants as predictors of ra conversion.
conclusion
dna methylation is a dynamic process in acpa individuals atrisk for developing ra that eventually transition to clinical disease.
in contrast nonconverters and controls have stable methylomes.
the accumulation of epigenetic marks over time prior to conversion to clinical ra conforms to pathways that are associated with immunity and can be used to identify potential pathogenic pathways for therapeutic targeting andor use as prognostic biomarkers."
"eagle rays cownose rays and manta rays family myliobatidae have a slender tail that can be longer than the animal’s body length but its function and structure are unknown.
using histology immunohistochemistry and 3d imaging with microct scans we describe the anatomy and function of the tail in  the cownose ray.
the tail is an extension of the vertebral column with unique morphological specializations.
along the tail behind the barb vertebral centra are absent and neural and hemal arches fuse and form a solid mineralized structure that we term the caudal synarcual which imparts passive stiffness to the tail reducing bending.
two lateral line canals connected to an extensive tubule network extend along both sides of the tail.
tubules branch from the lateral line canal toward the dorsal and ventral tail surfaces and open to the surrounding water via pores.
a continuous neuromast is located within each lateral line canal maintaining an interrupted structure along the entire tail.
the complex lateral line mechanosensory system in the tail of  supports the hypothesis that the tail functions like a hydrodynamic sensory antenna and may play an important role in their behavioral and functional ecology."
 formerly at patch biosciences
"the inherent helical structure of dna dictates that a replisome must rotate relative to dna during replication presenting inevitable topological challenges to replication.
however little is known about how the replisome progresses against torsional stress.
here we developed a labelfree highresolution realtime assay to monitor replisome movement under torsion.
we visualized the replisome rotation of dna and determined how the replisome slows down under torsion.
we found that while helicase or dna polymerase dnap individually is a weak torsional motor the replisome composed of both enzymes is the most powerful dna torsional motor studied to date.
it generates  22 pn·nm of torque before stalling twice the stall torque of"
"in gramnegative bacterial sepsis excessive caspase 411 activation in response to circulating bacterial lipid lps endotoxemia can cause organ damage and mortality.
current inhibitors of caspase 411 also block caspase 1 activity and are therefore not appealing clinical candidates for treating gramnegative sepsis.
here we identify doubleunsaturated 182 cardiolipin as a selective inhibitor of caspase 411dependent inflammatory cytokine secretion and pyroptosis without affecting caspase1 responses.
cardiolipin targets the card domain of caspase 411 impeding its interaction with lps to restrain caspase 411 activation thereby suppressing endotoxemiainduced systemic inflammation in vivo.
thus we present cardiolipin as a promising candidate for preventing endotoxemiainduced sequelae in sepsis while preserving caspase1driven antimicrobial immune responses.
by identifying cardiolipin as a specific caspase 411 inhibitor we provide an urgentlyneeded tool for studying caspase 411 functions in inflammatory pathways and open the way to studies of noncanonical inflammasome regulation by endogenous cardiolipin."
"misfolded glycoproteins in the endoplasmic reticulum er lumen are translocated into the cytosol and degraded by the proteasome a conserved process called erassociated protein degradation erad.
in s. cerevisiae the glycan of these proteins is trimmed by the luminal mannosidase mnl1 htm1 to generate a signal that triggers degradation.
curiously mnl1 is permanently associated with protein disulfide isomerase pdi1.
here we have used cryoelectron microscopy biochemical and in vivo experiments to clarify how this complex initiates erad.
the mnl1pdi1 complex first demannosylates misfolded globular proteins that are recognized through a cterminal domain ctd of mnl1 pdi1 causes the ctd to ignore completely unfolded polypeptides.
the disulfides of these globular proteins are then reduced by the pdi1 component of the complex generating unfolded polypeptides that can be translocated across the membrane.
mnl1 blocks the canonical oxidative function of pdi1 but allows it to function as the elusive disulfide reductase in erad."
"while mrna vaccines have been effective in combating sarscov2 waning of vaccineinduced antibody responses and lack of vaccineinduced respiratory tract immunity contribute to ongoing infection and transmission.
in this work we compare and contrast intranasal i.n.
and intramuscular i.m.
administration of a sarscov2 selfamplifying rna sarna vaccine delivered by a nanostructured lipid carrier nlc.
both i.m.
and i.n.
vaccines induce potent systemic serum neutralizing antibodies bone marrowresident iggsecreting cells and splenic t cell responses.
the i.n.
vaccine additionally induces robust respiratory mucosal immune responses including sarscov2reactive lungresident memory and lunghoming t cell populations.
as a booster following previous i.m.
vaccination the i.n.
vaccine also elicits the development of mucosal virusspecific t cells.
both the i.m.
and i.n.
administered vaccines durably protect hamsters from infectionassociated morbidity upon viral challenge significantly reducing viral loads and preventing challenged hamsters from transmitting virus to naive cagemates.
this sarnanlc vaccines potent systemic immunogenicity and additional mucosal immunogenicity when delivered i.n.
may be key for combating sarscov2 and other respiratory pathogens."
"polygenic risk scores are widely used in disease risk stratification but their accuracy varies across diverse populations.
recent methods largescale leverage multiancestry data to improve accuracy in underrepresented populations but require labelling individuals by ancestry for prediction.
this poses challenges for practical use as clinical practices are typically not based on ancestry.
we propose splendid a novel penalized regression framework for diverse biobankscale data.
our method utilizes ancestry principal component interactions to model genetic ancestry as a continuum within a single prediction model for all ancestries eliminating the need for discrete labels.
in extensive simulations and analyses of 9 traits from the all of us research program n224364 and uk biobank n340140 splendid significantly outperformed existing methods in prediction accuracy and model sparsity.
by directly incorporating continuous genetic ancestry in model training splendid stands as a valuable tool for robust risk prediction across diverse populations and fairer clinical implementation."
"apoptotic cell death is regulated by the bcl2 protein family with clusters of bak or bax homodimers driving pore formation in the mitochondrial outer membrane via a poorly understood process.
there is growing evidence that in addition to bak and bax lipids play an important role in pore formation.
towards a better understanding of the lipidic drivers of  apoptotic pore formation in isolated mitochondria two complementary approaches were taken.
firstly the lipids released during bakmediated pore formation were measured with targeted lipidomics revealing enrichment of long chain polyunsaturated lysophospholipids lpls in the released fraction.
in contrast the bak protein was not released suggesting that bak and lpls locate to distinct microdomains.
secondly added cholesterol not only prevented pore formation but prevented the clustering of bak homodimers.
our data lead us to a model in which bak clustering triggers formation of a separate microdomain rich in lpls that can progress to lipid shedding and the opening of a lipidlined pore.
pore stabilisation and growth may be due to bak dimers then moving to the pore edge.
our baklipid microdomain model supports the heterogeneity of bak assemblies and the observed lipidrelease signature gives new insight into the genesis of the apoptotic pore."
"cardiovascular disease cvd is commonly due to the development of atherosclerosis.
endothelial integrity is critical in the prevention of pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.
the key to prevention of cvd is understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for initiation of early atherosclerosis.
mirnas are mediators of endothelial homeostasis and their dysregulation could lead to early atherosclerotic disorder.
we previously revealed the expression of mir7975 in early atherosclerotic lesions.
the aim of this study was to investigate the novel roles of mir7975 on endothelial cell proliferation and migration and in the regulation of metadherin mtdh expression.
we performed proliferation and migration assays coupled with luciferase assay.
we show that mir7975 promotes proliferation and migration of endothelial cells and that mir7976 directly regulates mtdh previously associated with cancer pathogenesis.
in conclusion our results show mir7975 could be a potential mediator of endothelial homeostasis and that mtdh is a novel target of mir7975."
"epigenetic regulation orchestrates mammalian transcription but functional links between them remain elusive.
to tackle this problem we use epigenomic and transcriptomic data from 13 encode cell types to train machine learning models to predict gene expression from histone posttranslational modifications ptms achieving transcriptomewide correlations of 0.700.79 for most cell types.
our models recapitulate known associations between histone ptms and expression patterns including predicting that acetylation of histone subunit h3 lysine residue 27 h3k27ac near the transcription start site tss significantly increases expression levels.
to validate this prediction experimentally and investigate how natural vs. engineered deposition of h3k27ac might differentially affect expression we apply the synthetic dcas9p300 histone acetyltransferase system to 8 genes in the hek293t cell line and to 5 genes in the k562 cell line.
further to facilitate model building we perform mnaseseq to map genomewide nucleosome occupancy levels in hek293t.
we observe that our models perform well in accurately ranking relative foldchanges among genes in response to the dcas9p300 system however their ability to rank foldchanges within individual genes is noticeably diminished compared to predicting expression across cell types from their native epigenetic signatures.
our findings highlight the need for more comprehensive genomescale epigenome editing datasets better understanding of the actual modifications made by epigenome editing tools and improved causal models that transfer better from endogenous cellular measurements to perturbation experiments.
together these improvements would facilitate the ability to understand and predictably control the dynamic human epigenome with consequences for human health."
"the microbiome is a hidden organ system with diverse metabolic roles.
using bacteroides thetaiotaomicron b theta as a model we asked how microbiome species process iron the quintessential biometal supporting respiration and life as we know it when iron is provided in complex with protoporphyrin ix ppix as heme.
canonical pathways for reclaiming hemeiron from host cells or the diet require o2 which is unavailable in the gi tract and many pathological microenvironments.
hmus a homolog of cobalamine vitamin b12 and chlorophyllbuilding chelatases is widespread in anaerobic microbial ecosystems.
in this work we provide direct physiological biochemical and structural evidence for the anaerobic removal of iron from heme by hmus a dechelatase that deconstructs heme to ppix and feii.
we show that heme can be used as a sole iron source by b theta yielding ppix and that hmus inactivation under these conditions is lethal.
iron removal from heme depends on the b theta membrane fraction nadh and o2 exclusion.
absorbance spectra indicate that heterologously expressed hmus is isolated with a nonsubstrate heme bound and can accommodate multiple heme equivalents under saturating conditions.
solution of the cryoem structure reveals heme and two cations at sites that are conserved across the hmus family and the chelatase superfamily respectively.
the proposed structurebased mechanism for iron removal further links biosynthetic and biodegradative pathways for heme chlorophyll and vitamin b12 3 ancient and biologically crucial metallocofactors."
"some scientists reach top citation impact in a very short time once they start publishing.
the current analysis defined precocious citation impact as rising to become a topcited scientist within t≤8 years after the first publication year.
ultraprecocious citation impact was defined similarly for t ≤5 years.
topcited authors included those in the top2 of a previously validated composite citation indicator across 174 subfields of science or in the top100000 authors of that composite citation indicator across all science based on scopus.
annual data between 2017 and 2023 show a strong increase over time with 469 precocious and 66 ultraprecocious citation impact scopus author ids in 2023. indepth assessment of validated ultraprecocious scientists in 2023 showed significantly higher frequency of less developed country affiliation 71 clustering in 4 highrisk subfields environmental sciences energy artificial intelligence  image processing mechanical engineering  transports 64 selfcitations for their field  above the 95th percentile 31 being topcited only when selfcitations were included 20 citations to citing papers ratio for their field above the 95th percentile 15 extreme publishing behavior 7 and extreme citation orchestration metric ch22.45 15 compared with all topcited authors p0.005 for all signals.
the 17 ultraprecocious citation impact authors in the 20172020 topcited lists who had retractions by october 2024 showed on average 4 of these 7 signal indicators at the time they entered the topcited list.
while some authors with precocious citation impact may be stellar scientists others probably herald massive manipulative or fraudulent behaviors infiltrating the scientific literature."
"competition for food and reproductive interference negative interspecific sexual interactions have been identified as major drivers of species exclusion.
still how these biotic interactions jointly determine competitive dominance remains largely unknown.
we tackle this by coupling population models and laboratory experiments with two spider mite sibling species.
using experiments specifically designed to measure the single and combined effects of food competition and reproductive interference we first show that the strength and symmetry of reproductive interference between species changes in presence of food competition.
next we show that population models incorporating each type of interaction alone or their effects when combined lead to markedly different predictions from exclusion by one species or the other to exclusion of the less abundant species.
moreover accounting for the observed reduction in the strength of reproductive interference in the presence of food competition changes the threshold frequency determining the dominant competitor favouring the superior competitor for food.
finally model predictions for shortterm population dynamics were corroborated with an independent population cage experiment.
altogether our results suggest that trophic interactions can modulate sexual interactions significantly impacting population dynamics and competitive outcomes.
hence the joint consideration of food competition and reproductive interference is critical to accurately predict and understand species coexistence."
"in order to maintain genomic integrity dna replication must be highly coordinated.
disruptions in this process can cause replication stress which is aberrant in many pathologies including cancer.
despite this little is known about the mechanisms governing the temporal regulation of dna replication initiation thought to be related to the limited copy number of firing factors.
here we present a high 1kilobase resolution stochastic model of saccharomyces cerevisiae wholegenome replication in which origins compete to associate with limited firing factors.
after developing an algorithm to fit this model to replication timing data we validated the model by reproducing experimental interorigin distances origin efficiencies and replication fork directionality.
this suggests the model accurately simulates the aspects of dna replication most important for determining its dynamics.
we also use the model to predict measures of dna replication dynamics which are yet to be determined experimentally and investigate the potential impacts of variations in firing factor concentrations on dna replication."
"characterizing the noncoding regions of the genome particularly the cisregulatory elements cres located in accessible chromatin regions acrs in gene promoters is crucial for understanding how gene expression is regulated and how genotype contributes to phenotypic diversity in plants.in this study we used atacseq to resequence and map the acrs of 214 maize inbred lines.
we identified 82174 acrs and reported that 39.55 of them exhibited significant variation across the population.
next we used the accessibility of acrs as a quantitative feature and performed a chromatin associability gwas cagwas resulting in 27004 caqtls.
among them 2463 were predicted to disrupt the cisregulatory elements that tf binds in these acrs suggesting that tf binding affects chromatin accessibility.
specifically we identified two caacrs that regulate the expression of fad7 which encodes a fatty acid desaturase and affects the linolenic acid content.our findings highlight the dynamic nature of maize acrs and demonstrate that chromatin accessibility information could be used for gwass offering key insights into the genetic and regulatory mechanisms of chromatin accessibility and its impact on complex traits in plants."
"purpose to examine the effects of voluntary exercise training on tumor growth and explore the underlying intratumoral molecular pathways and processes responsible for the beneficial effects of vwr on tumor initiation and progression in a mouse model of castrationresistant prostate cancer crpc.
methods male immunodeficient mice scid were castrated and subcutaneously inoculated with human cwr22rv1 cancer cells to construct crpc xenograft model before randomly assigned to either voluntary wheel running vwr or sedentary sed group n6group.
after three weeks tumor tissues were collected.
tumor size was measured and calculated.
mrna expression of markers of dna replication androgen receptor ar signaling and mitochondrial dynamics was determined by rtpcr.
protein expression of mitochondrial content and dynamics was determined by western blotting.
finally rnasequencing analysis was performed in the tumor tissues.
results voluntary wheel running resulted in smaller tumor volume at the initial stage and attenuated tumor progression throughout the time course p  0.05. the reduction of tumor volume in vwr group was coincided with lower mrna expression of dna replication markers mcm2 mcm6 and mcm7 ar signaling elovl5 and fkbp5 and regulatory proteins of mitochondrial fission drp1 and fis1 and fusion mfn1 and opa1 when compared to the sed group p0.05.
more importantly rna sequencing data further revealed that pathways related to pathways related to angiogenesis extracellular matrix formation and endothelial cell proliferation were downregulated.
conclusions three weeks of vwr was effective in delaying tumor initiation and progression which coincided with reduced transcription of dna replication ar signaling targets and mitochondrial dynamics.
we further identified reduced molecular pathwaysprocesses related to angiogenesis that may be responsible for the delayed tumor initiation and progression by vwr."
"the rna degradosome a multiprotein complex regulating mrna in bacteria assembles on the rnase e cterminal domain ctd in pseudomonadota proteobacteria via short linear motifs slims.
the composition of the pseudomonas aeruginosa rna degradosome is largely unknown and its rnase e ctd shows limited similarity to those in models like escherichia coli or caulobacter crescentus.
our study characterizes the function of conserved slims in p. aeruginosa rnase e including a duplicated sequence termed the reerrepeats region.
this region along with ar1 and ar4 slims mediates rna binding and localizes the degradosome in subcellular foci.
pulldown and bacterial twohybrid assays identified pnpase and rhlb as interacting proteins with direct interactions confirmed via protein binding assays.
the ndpr and ar1 slims mediate these interactions respectively.
transcriptome analyses and phenotypic assays of rnase e ctd mutants revealed growth defects in specific conditions and virulence defects revealing the importance of rnase e ctd rna binding and rna degradosome scaffolding for p. aeruginosa adaptability."
"population cycles are prevalent in ecosystems and play key roles in determining their functions.
while multiple mechanisms have been theoretically shown to generate population cycles there are limited examples of mutualisms driving selfsustained oscillations.
using an engineered microbial community that crossfeeds essential amino acids we experimentally demonstrate cycles in strain abundance that are robust across environmental conditions.
a nonlinear dynamical model that incorporates the experimentally observed crossinhibition of amino acid production recapitulates the population cycles.
the model shows that the cycles represent internally generated relaxation oscillations which emerge when fast resource dynamics with positive feedback drive slow changes in strain abundance.
our findings highlight the critical role of resource dynamics and feedback in shaping population cycles in microbial communities and have implications for biotechnology."
"autocatalysis is seen as a potential key player in the origin of life and perhaps more generally in the emergence of darwinian dynamics.
building on recent formalizations of this phenomenon we tackle the computational challenge of exhaustively detecting autocatalytic cycles in reactions networks and further evaluate the impact of thermodynamic constraints on their realization under mass action kinetics.
we first characterize the complexity of the detection problem by proving its npcompleteness.
this justifies the use of constraint solvers to list all autocatalytic cycles in a given reaction network and also to group them into compatible sets composed of cycles whose stoichiometric requirements are not contradictory.
crucially we show that the introduction of thermodynamic realism does constrain the composition of these sets.
compatibility relationships among cycles can indeed be disrupted when the reaction kinetics obey thermodynamic consistency throughout the network.
on the contrary these constraints have no impact on the realizability of isolated cycles unless upper or lower bounds are imposed on the concentrations of the reactants.
overall by better characterizing the conditions of autocatalysis in complex reaction systems this work brings us a step closer to assessing the contribution of this collective chemical behavior to the emergence of natural selection in the primordial soup."
"the utilization of unconventional feed resources such as water hyacinth is an effective strategy to address feed shortages in tropical and subtropical regions particularly where access to conventional feeds is limited.
in this study tropical sheep doyogena rams and goats woyitoguji bucks fed diets containing different amounts of wh were examined for their zootechnical performance and profitability sing a 2 × 4 × 4 randomized crossover design with two animal species four nutritional treatments and four feeding intervals.
the dietary treatments consisted of 50 hay  0 wh  50 commercial concentrate cc t1 50 hay  12.5 wh  37.5 cc t2 50 hay  25 wh  25 cc t3 and 50 hay  37.5 wh  12.5 cc t4.
the findings showed that compared to goats sheep had the highest energy and nutrient intake p0.001 nutrient digestibility p0.001 average daily gain adg gday and body weight change bwc kg p0.05.
regarding energy and nutritional intake there was a substantial difference p  0.001 between treatment groups for both animal species with the exception of goats’ consumption of dm om cho ge and adl p 0.05. likewise significant differences existed between treatment groups for nutritional digestibility adg bwc and fce for both species p 0.001. moreover significant interactions p  0.005 were seen in all energy and nutrient intake parameters between species and treatment.
furthermore in tropical sheep and goat breeds water hyacinth can replace up to 37.5 of the commercial concentrate used for growth and fattening but it has a major comparative effect on sheep.
feed prices for the t4 group fed sheep and goats were 37.2 and 36.8 lower respectively than for the t1 group.
therefore farmers in the tropics who cannot afford commercial concentrates can still benefit economically by using the dry biomass of water hyacinth in their diet either with or without it."
"background
bacillus methanolicus is the next workhorse in biotechnology using methanol an alternative and economical onecarbon feedstock that can be obtained directly from carbon dioxide as both carbon and energy source for the production of various valueadded chemicals.
the wildtype strain b. methanolicus mga3 naturally overproduces lglutamate in methanolbased fedbatch fermentations.
results
here we generated by induced mutagenesis an evolved b. methanolicus strain exhibiting enhanced lglutamate production capability 150. to showcase the potential of this evolved strain further metabolic engineering enabled the production of γaminobutyric acid gaba directly from lglutamate with a yield of 13.2 gl from methanol during fedbatch fermentations.
by using a systemslevel analysis encompassing wholegenome sequencing rna sequencing fluxome analysis and genomescale metabolic modelling we were able to elucidate the metabolic and regulatory adaptations that sustain the biosynthesis of these products.
the metabolism of the mutant strain evolved to prioritize energy conservation and efficient carbon utilization.
key metabolic shifts include the downregulation of energyintensive processes such as flagellation and motility and the rerouting of carbon fluxes towards αketoglutarate and its derivative lglutamate.
moreover we observed that transformation of the evolved strain with a gaba biosynthesis plasmid had a positive effect on lglutamate production likely due to an upregulation of various transaminases involved in the lglutamate biosynthesis from αketoglutarate.
conclusions
these results and insights provide a foundation for further rational metabolic engineering and bioprocess optimization enhancing the industrial viability of b. methanolicus for sustainable production of lglutamate and its derivatives."
"1. plant chemistry mediates interactions between plants and their environment.
while intraspecific chemodiversity at the plant level is wellstudied the effects of chemodiversity at the community level on arthropod interactions need more attention.
we conducted a field experiment to test how intraspecific chemodiversity affects plantarthropod interactions."
" pediatric pulmonary vein stenosis pvs is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality for the subset of patients with recurrent or progressive disease.
the molecular mechanisms underlying the development and trajectory of pvs remain unclear.
this study characterizes the transcriptome of clinical and phenotypic subtypes of pvs."
"computerized cognitive training programs are becoming increasingly popular and practical for cognitive aging.
nevertheless basic questions remain about the benefits of such programs and about the degree to which participant expectations might influence training and transfer.
here we examined a commercial cognitive training program  in a 5week doubleblind pseudorandomized placebocontrolled trial.
based on a priori power analysis we recruited 99 healthy older adults 5991 years of age m  68.87 sd  6.31 69 women assigning them to either the intervention or an active control program sudoku and nback working memory exercises.
we subdivided both groups into high and low expectation priming conditions to probe for effects of participants’ expectations on training and transfer.
we assessed transfer using a battery of standard neuropsychological and psychosocial measures that had been agreed to by the training program developers.
we planned and preregistered our analyses on osf.io.
the majority 88 of participants progressed through the training and most provided positive feedback about it.
similarly the majority 80 of participants believed they were truly training their brains.
yet transfer of training was minimal.
also minimal were any effects of expectations on training and transfer although participants who received high expectation priming tended to engage more with their assigned program overall.
our findings suggest limited benefits of  training on cognition and psychosocial wellbeing in healthy older adults at least under the conditions we used."
"in many bacteria the location of the mrna start codon is determined by a short ribosome binding site sequence that base pairs with the 3′end of 16s ribosomal rna rrna in the 30s subunit.
many groups have changed these short sequences termed the shinedalgarno sd sequence in the mrna and the antishinedalgarno asd sequence in 16s rrna to create “orthogonal” ribosomes to enable the synthesis of orthogonal polymers in the presence of the endogenous translation machinery.
however orthogonal ribosomes are prone to sdindependent translation.
ribosomal protein bs1 which binds to the 30s ribosomal subunit is thought to promote translation initiation by shuttling mrna to the ribosome.
thus a better understanding of how the sd and bs1 contribute to start codon selection could help efforts to improve the orthogonality of ribosomes.
here we engineered the  ribosome to prevent binding of bs1 to the 30s subunit to separate the activity of bs1 binding to the ribosome from the role of the mrna sd sequence in start codon selection.
we find that ribosomes lacking bs1 are slightly less active than wildtype ribosomes .
furthermore orthogonal 30s subunits lacking bs1 do not have improved orthogonality.
our findings suggest that mrna features outside the sd sequence and independent of bs1 binding to the ribosome likely contribute to start codon selection and the lack of orthogonality of present orthogonal ribosomes."
"currently type 1 diabetes t1d can be treated through implantation of allogenic islets which replenish the beta cell population however this method requires an extensive postimplantation immunosuppressant regimen.
personalized cellular therapy can address this through implantation of an autologous cell population induced pluripotent stem cells ipscs.
cellular therapy however requires an encapsulation device for implantation and so to achieve this uniformly with cells in a clinical setting bioprinting is required.
bioprinting is dependent on having a bioink that is printable retains structural fidelity after printing and is supportive of cell type and function.
the objective of this study was to design and develop bioinks that were compatible with printing islets.
here we detail the successful bioprinting of both primary human islets and ipscderived islets embedded in an alginatemethylcellulose bioink with functionality sustained within the construct for both cell lineages.
scrnaseq analysis also revealed that printing did not adversely affect the genetic expression and metabolic functionality of the ipscderived islets.
importantly the ipscderived islets displayed comparable functionality to the primary islets indicating the potential to act as a cell source alternative for t1d implantation."
"sexual conflict over shared traits  intralocus sexual conflict iasc  may be common and consequential but experimental tests of its relative magnitude are challenging and limited in number.
we use a sexlimited selection experiment designed to subject genomic haplotypes of drosophila melanogaster to selection for male fitness without opposing selection acting on female fitness.
importantly we use three novel base populations to compare results with those from the lhm population the sole population investigated using this technique.
in contrast with previous studies we find that male fitness of haplotypes subject to malelimited selection ml populations are not consistently better than their matched mc controls when tested in the wildtype state.
males from ml lines did not outperform controls in competitive fitness assays mate choice trials fecundity induction or sperm offense tests.
as predicted genetic variation for male fitness was reduced with low fitness haplotypes apparently removed by selection but this was only surveyed in one replicate population pair and included a potential artefact in the protocol.
female fitness was markedly reduced by carriage of ml genomic haplotypes as predicted by sexual antagonism.
hence our results are only partially consistent with the iasc hypothesis raising questions about the relative contribution of sexual conflict to the standing genetic variation in these populations and the potential role of artefacts in the protocol that may have obscured our ability to detect iasc."
"the global application of  acari phytoseiidae as a biological control agent across various protected crops has proven effective against a range of insect pests like thrips and whiteflies as well as pest mites like broad mites and russet mites.
optimization of rearing  under laboratory conditions is crucial for further studies of this species to improve their application in integrated pest management ipm programs.
here we evaluated the development and reproduction of  when fed on four different diets including cattail pollen  living dried fruit mites  frozen  eggs and a mixed diet of frozen  eggs and  pollen.
females consuming the mixed diet exhibited superior total fecundity and daily oviposition rate along with the highest intrinsic rate of increase r and net productive rate r among all diets tested.
the immature period was significantly longer for mites on a diet of living  compared to those on other diets.
importantly utilizing frozen  eggs and"
"the mining of genomes across life has unearthed a bounty of biosynthetic potential to diverse molecules key to a biobased future.
while the heterologous expression of metabolic pathways has achieved broad success most approaches suffer a similar fate in low initial production levels that require extensive resourceheavy iterative strain engineering refinement.
herein we introduce a growthcoupled biosynthetic growbio strategy that irrevocably connects microbial growth with specialized compound production.
we demonstrate the plugandplay versatility of growbio in the production of the structurally complex animal biopigment xanthommatin a colorchanging ommochrome with material and cosmetic potential.
xanthommatin biosynthesis directly fuels growth of a newly designed"
"in the military combat wound infections can progress rapidly to lifethreatening sepsis.
discovery of effective small molecule drugs to prevent andor treat sepsis is a priority.
to identify potential sepsis drug candidates we used an optimized larval zebrafish model of endotoxicitysepsis  to screen commercial libraries of u.s. food and drug administration fda approved drugs and other active pharmaceutical ingredients api known to affect pathways implicated in the initiation and progression of sepsis in humans i.e.
inflammation mitochondrial dysfunction coagulation and apoptosis.
we induced endotoxicity in 3 and 5day post fertilization larval zebrafish characterized by mortality and tail fin edema vascular leakage by immersion exposure to  60 μgml lipopolysaccharide lps for 24 hours then screened for the rescue potential of 644 selected drugs simultaneously with lps at 10 μm.
after lps exposure we used a neurobehavioral assay lightdark test to further evaluate rescue from endotoxicity and to determine possible offtarget drug side effects.
we identified 29 drugs with  60 rescue of tail edema and mortality.
three drugs ketanserin tegaserod and brexpiprazole produced 100 rescue and did not differ from the controls in the lightdark test suggesting a lack of offtarget neurobehavioral effects.
further testing of these three drugs at a nearly 100 lethal concentration of  lps 45 μgml showed 100 rescue from mortality and 88100 mitigation against tail edema.
the success of the three identified drugs in a zebrafish endotoxicitysepsis model warrants further evaluation in mammalian sepsis models."
"during development and tissue repair cells reshape and reconfigure to ensure organs take specific shapes.
this process is inherently threedimensional 3d.
yet in part due to limitations in imaging and data analysis cell shape analysis within tissues have been studied as a twodimensional 2d approximation .. the  wing disc.
with recent advances in imaging and machine learning there has been significant progress in our understanding of 3d cell and tissue shape .
however even after gaining 3d segmentation of cells it remains challenging to extract cell shape metrics beyond volume and surface area for cells within densely packed tissues.
in order to extract 3d shape metrics we have developed cellmet.
this userfriendly tool enables extraction of quantitative shape information from 3d cell and tissue segmentation.
it is developed for extracting cell scale information from densely packed tissues such as cell face properties cell twist and cell rearrangements.
our method will improve the analysis of 3d cell shape and the understanding of cell organisation within tissues.
our tool is open source available at"
"current treatments targeting individual protein quality control have limited efficacy in alleviating proteinopathies highlighting the prerequisite for a common upstream druggable target capable of global proteostasis modulation.
building on our prior research establishing nuclear speckles as a pivotal membraneless organelle responsible for global proteostasis transcriptional control we aim to alleviate proteinopathies through nuclear speckle rejuvenation.
we identified pyrvinium pamoate as a smallmolecule nuclear speckle rejuvenator that enhances protein quality control while suppressing yap1 signaling via decreasing the surfaceinterfacial tension of nuclear speckle condensates through interaction with the intrinsically disordered region of nuclear speckle scaffold protein son.
in preclinical models nanomolar pyrvinium pamoate alleviated retina degeneration and reduced tauopathy by promoting autophagy and ubiquitinproteasome system in a sondependent manner without causing cellular stress.
aberrant nuclear speckle morphology reduced protein quality control and increased yap1 activity were also observed in human tauopathies.
our study uncovers novel therapeutic targets for tackling protein misfolding disorders within an expanded proteostasis framework encompassing nuclear speckles and yap1."
"hematopoietic stem cells hscs and more committed progenitors collectively referred to as hspcs emerge from vessels during development via endothelialtohematopoietic transition eht.
recently using the zebrafish embryo we showed that two eht cell types emerge from the aorta raising the question of their subsequent fate.
to address this issue we established a complex pipeline based on singlecell photoconversion and transgenic lines to characterize the transcriptomic profiles of single eht cell type progenies.
we obtained at unprecedented resolution in the early larva a cartography of hspcs and highly diversified differentiated populations notably nklike cell types innate lymphoid cells and early eosinophils.
we show that the two eht cell types previously characterized indeed lead to differentially fated cells with significant differences in thymus colonization and tlymphoid lineage commitment.
using hspc signatures retrieved from our datasets   namely gata2b and cd34podocalyxin  and to address niches we performed in situ gene expression analyses via rnascope.
unexpectedly we unveil a niche contacting the supraintestinal artery.
finally integration with previous datasets reveal that our populations contain potential developmental hscs bearing signatures highly similar with adult hscs."
"drugtarget interaction dti prediction plays a crucial role in drug development impacting areas such as virtual screening drug repurposing and the identification of potential drug side effects.
despite significant efforts dedicated to improving dti prediction existing methods still struggle with the challenges posed by the high sparsity of dti datasets and the complexity of capturing heterogeneous information in biological networks.
to address these challenges we propose a unified framework for dti prediction based on a semanticsguided metapath walk.
specifically we first pretrain drug and protein embeddings to capture their semantic information.
this semantic information is then leveraged to guide a metapathbased random walk on the biological heterogeneous network generating sequences of interactions.
these sequences are used to compute embedding features via a heterogeneous skipgram model which are subsequently fed into downstream tasks to predict dtis.
sgmdti achieves substantial performance improvement over other stateoftheart methods for drugtarget interaction prediction.
moreover it excels in the coldstart scenario which is often a challenging case in dti prediction.
these results indicate the effectiveness of our approach in predicting drugtarget interactions.experimental datasets and experimental codes can be found in httpsgithub.comhylprcsgmdti."
"fumarateadding enzymes fae are a subset of the glycyl radical enzyme superfamily involved in anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation.
benzylsuccinate synthase bss catalyzes the enantiospecific formation of benzylsuccinate from toluene and fumarate initiating anaerobic toluene degradation.
in this study we present a detailed theoretical study of the reaction mechanism using classical molecular dynamics and multiscale modelling qmmm.
we describe the potential energy surface of the reaction confirming the previously postulated mechanism.
however the multiscale character of our model allowed to elucidate the origins of several experimentally observed catalytic phenomena such as the inversion of the configuration of the benzylic atom upon cc bond formation syn addition of the abstracted h atom back to the benzylsuccinyl radical or kinetic isotope effects in the range of 1.72.1. the obtained model is supported by microkinetic analysis and was able to explain and quantitatively predict the strict enantioselectivity of bss which is not enforced by the binding orientation of the fumarate but by dynamic kinetic behaviour of toluene in the active site leading to faster production of the renantiomer.
we were also able to explain the experimentally observed slow hd exchange in the product during incubation with bss in d"
"despite advancements in breast cancer treatment metastasis remains a significant challenge contributing to high mortality rates.
this study investigates the mechanisms underlying breast cancer lung metastasis with a particular emphasis on the role of sh3pxd2b in driving epithelialtomesenchymal transition.
here we analyzed rna sequencing data from ccle and tcga databases and characterized that sh3pxd2b expression is elevated in breast cancer bc and lung cancer lc tissues compared to nontransformed tissues.
bioinformatics analysis revealed that sh3pxd2b regulates several cellular processes and is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer brca and lung adenocarcinoma luad patients.
functional experiments underscore that the upregulation of sh3pxd2b promoted bc and lc cell migration in vitro however its knockdown inhibited the effect.
mechanistically the mass spectrometry analysis was utilized to pull down interacting partners of sh3pxd2b and the findings were substantiated by immunoblotting.
additionally our findings on immunofluorescence and gene expression analysis demonstrated the additive role of sh3pxd2b and migratory proteins in promoting breast cancer progression.
further we performed bioluminescent ivis imaging analysis to trace the metastatic spread of mdamb468 cells and observed strong signals and a high degree of dissemination to distant organs.
collectively our results highlight the importance of sh3 domains in aggravating breast transformation which can therefore serve as a promising therapeutic strategy in counteracting breastrelated malignancy."
"background exercising with low muscle glycogen content can improve training adaptation but the mechanisms underlying the muscular adaptation are still largely unknown.
in this study we measured substrate utilization and cell signaling in different muscle fiber types during exercise and investigated a possible link between these variables.
methods five subjects performed a single leg cycling exercise in the evening day 1 with the purpose of reducing glycogen stores.
the following morning day 2 they performed twolegged cycling at 70 of vo for 1h.
muscle biopsies were taken from both legs pre and postexercise for enzymatic analyses of glycogen metabolite concentrations using lcmsmsbased quantification and protein signaling using western blot in pools of type i or type ii fibers.
results glycogen content was 6065 lower for both fiber types p0.01 in the leg that exercised on day 1 low leg compared to the other leg with normal level of glycogen normal leg before the cycling exercise on day 2. glycogen utilization during exercise was significantly less in both fiber types in the low compared to the normal leg p0.05.
in the low leg there was a 14 and 6fold increase in longchain fatty acids conjugated to carnitine in type i and type ii fibers respectively postexercise.
this increase was 34 times larger than in the normal leg p0.05.
postexercise mtor phosphorylation was increased in both fiber types in the normal leg p0.05 but remained unchanged in both fiber types in the low leg together with an increase in eef2"
"ash dieback adb caused by the invasive alien fungal pathogen  is an emerging disease that poses major threats to the survival of common ash  in europe.
here we report on a field trial aiming at the identification of adb tolerant genotypes while encompassing the genetic diversity of common ash in austria.
over 35000 progenies from more than 600 putative tolerant mother trees were assessed for adb symptoms over a period of three years.
one tolerant and one susceptible progeny from a subset of the mother tree range 570 trees were genotyped using the 4tree array a genotyping tool developed specifically to screen common ash provenances for their tolerance to ash dieback.
we aimed to 1 better characterize the genetic structure of common ash in austria 2 identify hybrids between common ash and  narrowleaved ash 3 detect genetic loci associated with tolerance to adb and 4 identify genetic variation associated with abiotic factors such as temperature and precipitation influencing the severity of adb.
we identify ash individuals from eastern austria matching putative hybrids with  showing varying degrees of  ancestry in structure analyses.
the nonhybrid gene pool is characterized by shallow genetic structure following a west to east geographic pattern.
in contrast to our expectations genotypedamage association analyses overall fail to detect snps associated with tolerance to adb.
our findings underscore that the polygenic architecture governing tolerance and the rapid decay of genomic linkage disequilibrium ld within approximately 10 kb significantly limit the ability to identify association outliers using the 4tree snp array.
this highlights the constrained utility of chip genotyping approaches for this specific purpose.
in contrast the array proves successful in detecting hybrids between common ash and narrowleaved ash as well as outlier snps associated with abiotic predictors such as annual precipitation and temperature known to influence the severity of adb damage."
"here we systematically studied the reproducibility of degs in previously published alzheimers disease ad parkinsons disease pd and covid19 scrnaseq studies.
we found that while transcriptional scores created from differentially expressed genes degs in individual pd and covid19 datasets had moderate predictive power for the case control status of other datasets mean auc0.77 and 0.75 respectively genes from individual ad datasets had poor predictive power mean auc0.68.
we developed a nonparametric metaanalysis method sumrank based on reproducibility of relative differential expression ranks across datasets.
the metaanalysis genes had improved predictive power aucs of 0.88 0.91 and 0.78 respectively.
by multiple other metrics specificity and sensitivity of these genes were substantially higher than those discovered by dataset merging and inverse variance weighted pvalue aggregation methods.
the degs revealed known and novel biological pathways and we validate the bcat1 gene as downregulated in oligodendrocytes in an ad mouse model.
our analyses show that for heterogeneous diseases degs of individual studies often have low reproducibility but combining information across multiple datasets promotes the rigorous discovery of reproducible degs."
 to explore health literacy levels of primary care patients and associations with demographic variables frequency of visits hospitalization rates and selfperception of health.
"cryptic pockets are of growing interest as potential drug targets particularly to control proteinnucleic acid interactions that often occur via flat surfaces.
however it remains unclear whether cryptic pockets contribute to protein function or if they are merely happenstantial features that can easily be evolved away to achieve drug resistance.
here we explore whether a cryptic pocket in the interferon inhibitory domain iid of viral protein 35 vp35 of zaire ebolavirus aids its ability to bind doublestranded rna dsrna.
we use simulations and experiments to study the relationship between cryptic pocket opening and dsrna binding of the iids of two other filoviruses reston and marburg.
these homologs have nearly identical structures but block different interferon pathways due to different affinities for blunt ends and backbone of the dsrna.
simulations and thiollabeling experiments demonstrate that the homologs have varying probabilities of pocket opening.
subsequent dsrnabinding assays suggest that closed conformations preferentially bind dsrna blunt ends while open conformations prefer binding the backbone.
point mutations that modulate pocket opening proteins further confirm this preference.
these results demonstrate the open cryptic pocket has a function suggesting cryptic pockets are under selective pressure and may be difficult to evolve away to achieve drug resistance."
"untargeted analysis using liquid chromatography‒mass spectrometry lcms allows quantification of known and unknown compounds within biological systems.
however in practical analysis of complex biological system the majority of compounds often remain unidentified.
here we developed a novel deep learningbased compound annotation approach via semantic similarity analysis of mass spectral language.
this approach enables the prediction of structurally related compounds for unknowns.
by considering the chemical space these structurally related compounds provide valuable information about the potential location of the unknown compounds and assist in ranking candidates obtained from molecular structure databases.
validated with two independent benchmark datasets obtained by chemical standards our method has consistently demonstrated superior performance compared to existing compound annotation methods.
a case study of the tomato ripening process indicates that deepmass has significant potential for metabolic biomarker identification in real biological systems.
overall the presented method shows considerable promise in annotating metabolites particularly in revealing the dark matter in untargeted analysis."
"cancer cells metastatic to the leptomeninges encounter a metabolicallychallenging extreme microenvironment.
to understand adaptations to this space we subjected leptomeningealmetastatic leptom mouse breast and lung cancers isolated from either the leptomeninges or orthotopic primary sites to atac and rnasequencing.
when inhabiting the leptomeninges the leptom cells demonstrated transcription downstream of retinoidxreceptors rxrs.
we found evidence of local retinoic acid ra generation in both human leptomeningeal metastasis and mouse models in the form of elevated spinal fluid retinol and expression of ragenerating dehydrogenases within the leptomeningeal microenvironment.
stimulating leptom cells with ra induced expression of transcripts encoding de novo fatty acid synthesis pathway enzymes in vitro.
in vivo while deletion of stra6 did not alter cancer cell leptomeningeal growth knockout of rxrabg interrupted cancer cell lipid biosynthesis and arrested cancer growth.
these observations illustrate a mechanism whereby metastatic cancer cells awake locallygenerated developmental cues for metabolically reprograming suggesting novel therapeutic approaches."
"this study demonstrates a silicon nanopillar metasurface coupled with localized surface plasmon resonance lspr mediated by the presence of cephalexin antibiotics in solution for biosensing applications.
a facile fabrication process was developed to create the metasurface on silicon wafers with a unique resonance signature.
the resulting metasurface consists of periodic nanopillars approximately 180 nm in diameter 210 nm deep and with a controlled edgetoedge separation of 200 nm.
these dimensions were chosen based on a finite element method simulation that was used to investigate the ideal parameters to produce the desired resonance effect in the metasurface reflection spectra.
optimization of the nanopillar surface properties and the sidewall angle allowed for replication of the simulations.
this metasurface was coupled with bsacoated gold nanospheres bsans to mediate the redshift of peak resonance wavelength values occurring only in the presence of the antibiotic linker.
the device fabricated herein exhibits a significant 22 nm wavelength shift resulting from changes to the local refractive index in the presence of the bsansantibiotic coupling.
further enhancement of the binding events is promoted by the lspr hot spots formed between the nanoparticles and the metasurface allowing for sensitive and realtime detection."
" mosquitoes are the principal vectors of dengue and continue to pose a threat to human health with ongoing urbanization climate change and trade all impacting the distribution and abundance of this species.
hot periods are becoming increasingly common and their impacts on insect mortality have been well established but they may have even greater impacts on insect fertility.
in this study we investigated the impacts of high temperatures on"
"withdrawal statements the authors have withdrawn their manuscript as they have discovered some potential inconsistencies in the analysis of the data.
therefore the authors do not wish this work to be cited as reference for the project."
"selected patients with large vessel occlusions lvo can benefit from thrombectomy up to 24 hours after onset.
identifying patients who might benefit from late intervention after transfer from community hospitals to thrombectomycapable centers would be valuable.
we searched for presentation biomarkers to identify such patients.
frequent mr imaging over 2 days of 38 untreated lvo patients revealed logarithmic growth of the ischemic infarct core.
in 24 patients with terminal internal carotid artery or the proximal middle cerebral artery occlusions we found that an infarct core growth rate igr 4.1 mlhr and initial infarct core volumes icv 19.9 ml had accuracies 89 for identifying patients who would still have a core of 50ml 24 hours after stroke onset a core size that should predict favorable outcomes with thrombectomy.
published reports indicate that up to half of all lvo stroke patients have an igr4.1 mlhr.
other potentially useful biomarkers include the nihss and the perfusion measurements mtt and tmax.
we conclude that many lvo patients have a stroke physiology that is favorable for late intervention and that there are biomarkers that can accurately identify them at early time points as suitable for transfer for intervention."
"the covid19 pandemic caused by the sarscov2 virus has resulted in significant global mortality and disruption.
despite extensive research the precise molecular mechanisms underlying sarscov2 replication remain unclear.
to address this we developed a singlemolecule forster resonance energy transfer smfret assay to directly visualize and analyse in vitro rna synthesis by the sarscov2 rnadependent rna polymerase rdrp.
we purified the minimal replication complex comprising nsp12 nsp7 and nsp8 and combined it with fluorescently labelled rna substrates enabling realtime monitoring of rna primer elongation at the singlemolecule level.
this platform allowed us to investigate the mechanisms of action of key inhibitors of sarscov2 replication.
in particular our data provides evidence for remdesivirs mechanism of action which involves polymerase stalling and subsequent chain termination dependent on the concentration of competing nucleotide triphosphates.
our study demonstrates the power of smfret to provide dynamic insights into sarscov2 replication offering a valuable tool for antiviral screening and mechanistic studies of viral rdrp activity."
"the activation of gene circuits can impose a significant burden on cells leading to heterogeneous expression and reduced productivity.
in this work we focused on the t7 production system in  bl21 a prime example of a burdensome gene circuit to investigate the main cause for this gene expression heterogeneity and methods to mitigate it.
based on continuous cultivation analyzed and control by automated flow cytometry we quantified the tradeoff between cellular growth and gene expression and tracked the celltocell heterogeneity in gene expression measured as entropy.
we concluded that the growth reduction associated to the activation of the burdensome gene circuit i.e.
the switching cost is at the origin of the population heterogeneity.
the loss of growth rate imposed by the burdensome activation of the gene is compensated at the population level by the overgrowth of less induced cells that safeguard the population by generating entropy.
we tried to homogenize the population by pulsing the inducer with increasing frequency but found that the population escapes control through promoter mutation leading to a genotype exhibiting reduced gene expression but also reduced entropy.
to engineer a more homogeneous population without sacrificing gene expression we decreased the switching cost associated to the induction by lowering the quality of the main carbon source.
this strategy successfully led to a more homogeneous and productive population.
our approach allows for a precise quantification of the tradeoff between growth and gene expression in cell population cultivated under dynamic conditions and highlights the importance of the switching cost for designing efficient approaches of cell population control."
"climate changeinduced heatwaves threaten global biodiversity including crucial pollinators like bumblebees.
despite alarming projections little is known about the effects of shortterm heatwaves on insect larval development.
hence we investigated the impact of simulated heatwaves on the development of fourth instar larvae l4 of  l. hymenoptera apidae using an"
"human neurogenesis is disproportionately protracted lasting 10 times longer than in mouse allowing neural progenitors to undergo more rounds of selfrenewing cell divisions and generate larger neuronal populations.
in the human spinal cord expansion of the motor neuron lineage is achieved through a newly evolved progenitor domain called vpmn ventral motor neuron progenitor that uniquely extends and expands motor neurogenesis.
this behavior of vpmns is controlled by transcription factor nkx22 which in vpmns is coexpressed with classical motor neuron progenitor pmn marker olig2.
in this study we sought to determine the molecular basis of nkx22mediated extension and expansion of motor neurogenesis.
we found that nkx22 represses proneural gene  by two distinct notchindependent mechanisms that are respectively apparent in rodent and human spinal progenitors in rodents and chick nkx22 represses  and the motor neuron lineage through its tinman domain leading to loss of  expression.
in human vpmns however nkx22 represses  but not  thereby allowing motor neurogenesis to proceed albeit in a delayed and protracted manner.
interestingly we found that ectopic expression of tinmanmutant  in mouse pmns phenocopies human vpmns repressing  but not  and leading to delayed and protracted motor neurogenesis.
our studies identify a notch and tinmanindependent mode of mediated  repression that is observed in human spinal progenitors but is normally masked in rodents and chicks due to ’s tinmandependent repression of ."
"singlecell rnasequencing holds promise for identifying novel markers of cellular variation for antibodybased technologies.
however antibody panel design is often difficult due to multiple experimental and biological constraints.
we introduce cytomarker an interactive platform enabling humanintheloop design of antibody panels from singlecell transcriptomic data.
we use cytomarker to spatially profile human mammary tissue subpopulations and develop a novel antibody screening approach to validate granular subpopulation predictions across 3.5m cells."
"some scientists reach top citation impact in a very short time once they start publishing.
the current analysis defined precocious citation impact as rising to become a topcited scientist within t≤8 years after the first publication year.
ultraprecocious citation impact was defined similarly for t ≤5 years.
topcited authors included those in the top2 of a previously validated composite citation indicator across 174 subfields of science or in the top100000 authors of that composite citation indicator across all science based on scopus.
annual data between 2017 and 2023 show a strong increase over time with 469 precocious and 66 ultraprecocious citation impact scopus author ids in 2023. indepth assessment of validated ultraprecocious scientists in 2023 showed significantly higher frequency of less developed country affiliation 71 clustering in 4 highrisk subfields environmental sciences energy artificial intelligence  image processing mechanical engineering  transports 64 selfcitations for their field  above the 95th percentile 31 being topcited only when selfcitations were included 20 citations to citing papers ratio for their field above the 95th percentile 15 extreme publishing behavior 7 and extreme citation orchestration metric ch22.45 15 compared with all topcited authors p0.005 for all signals.
the 17 ultraprecocious citation impact authors in the 20172020 topcited lists who had retractions by october 2024 showed on average 4 of these 7 signal indicators at the time they entered the topcited list.
while some authors with precocious citation impact may be stellar scientists others probably herald massive manipulative or fraudulent behaviors infiltrating the scientific literature."
"objective axial spondyloarthritis axspa is a common inflammatory arthritis with hlab27 as the major genetic risk.
recent discoveries of axspaspecific t cell receptor tcr motifs and the self and bacterial peptides that they recognize support a pathogenic role of cd8 t cells.
despite of previous work on synovial fluid the characteristics of cd8 cells in joint tissue are currently unknown.
method synovial tissues from 5 axspa patients were used for single cell rna sequencing scrna seq.
paired tcr sequencing was carried out for 2. the abundance of kir cd8 t cells in the blood from 9 axspa patients and 10 healthy controls was measured using flow cytometry.
the expression of naive and memory t cell markers ccr7 cd45ra and cd45ro were compared between kir and kir cd8 cells.
results we observed conventional trav12 mucosalassociated invariant t mait cell and mki67 proliferating cell populations in synovium.
following subclustering of conventional cd8 t cells hladr tissue resident memory trm circulating kir and fcgr3a encoding cd16 cell subsets were observed.
hladr trm and kir cells were clonally expanded and exhibited distinct transcriptional features enriched for t cell activation pathways and natural killer nk cell mediated cytotoxicity pathway respectively.
lastly kircd8 t cells were increased in axspa blood and enriched for cd45raccr7 temra cells.
conclusion here we present the very first transcriptomic profiling of cd8 t cells in synovium tissue and highlight potential roles of hladr trm and kir cells in axspa pathology.
this study adds novel insights to the disease mechanisms and offers new therapeutic opportunities."
"malaria parasites have evolved unusual metabolic adaptations that specialize them for growth within hemerich human erythrocytes.
during bloodstage infection"
"this study sheds light on how journalists respond to evolving debates within academia around topics including research integrity improper use of metrics to measure research quality and impact and the risks and benefits of the open science movement.
drawing on semistructured interviews with 19 health and science journalists we describe journalists’ awareness of these controversies and the ways in which that awareness in turn shapes the practices they use to select verify and communicate research.
our findings suggest that journalists’ perceptions of debates in scholarly communication vary widely with some displaying a highly critical and nuanced understanding and others presenting a more limited awareness.
those with a more indepth understanding report closely scrutinizing the research they report carefully vetting the study design methodology and analyses.
those with a more limited awareness are more trusting of the peer review system as a quality control system and more willing to rely on researchers when determining what research to report on and how to vet and frame it.
we discuss the benefits and risks of these varied perceptions and practices highlighting the implications for the nature of the research media coverage that reaches the public."
"background agerelated hearing loss arhl is the most common sensory loss in older adults but the underlying pathological mechanisms remain unclear.
recent genome wide association studies gwas have linked variation in a large number of genes with increased risk of arhl for the first time.
amongst the strongest of these associations is variation in klhdc7b a gene of unknown function and one not previously linked to hearing.
methods to confirm whether klhdc7b plays a role in hearing we investigated auditory function in two independent knockout mutant mouse models of klhdc7b  klhdc7bimpc and klhdc7bdd on the c57bl6n background and the b6.castcdh23753ag background respectively.
the b6.castcdh23753ag background was backcrossed to correct a known agerelated hearing loss ahl mutation in cadherin 23 present in both the c57bl6n and c57bl6j strains.
results we showed that klhdc7b is expressed exclusively in inner and outer sensory hair cells within the cochlea of mice at the rna and protein level.
homozygous mutants for both knockout mouse models display a similar earlyonset progressive and severe hearing loss.
histological characterization of the two mouse models suggests that hair cells develop normally and are present in neonates.
however after the onset of hearing there is a progressive loss of outer hair cells in a gradient from base to apex of the cochlea consistent with the hearing deficit in the mice and the pattern of hearing loss in arhl.
inner hair cells remain intact up to the latest age examined 8 weeks.
conclusions our data suggests klhdc7b is required for maintenance of auditory function rather than in its development supporting the novel association with arhl in humans detected in recent gwas.
to our knowledge this is the first validation in mouse of an arhl association in humans detected in a gwas.
our work also provides two distinct mouse models to further investigate the role of klhdc7b in auditory function and for use in the development of therapeutic tools to prevent or treat arhl."
"diatoms are a major phylum of microalgae playing crucial ecological roles.
they derive from secondary endosymbiosis of a red alga by an unknown heterotrophic eukaryote leading to a complex intracellular organization.
in response to unfavorable conditions stress diatoms store oil in lipid droplets ld raising interest for applications in particular biofuels.
in spite of numerous investigations aiming to increase their oil content ld biogenesis mechanisms in these organisms remain poorly understood.
in this study we functionally characterized the homolog of seipin a major actor of ld biogenesis in the diatom phaeodactylum tricornutum.
ptseipin shares conserved structural features with other seipins yet presents unique characteristics that appear common to diatoms and more broadly stramenopiles.
we provide evidence that stramenopiles seipins were inherited from the host during secondary endosymbiosis.
the localization of ptseipin highlights that ld biogenesis can arise simultaneously from the endoplasmic reticulum er and the plastids most external membrane.
finally the knockout of ptseipin leads to a strong increase of tag accumulation a feature that is not observed in other organisms and is greatly enhanced following high light exposure.
our results suggest a redirection of lipid fluxes towards tag synthesis reduced tag recycling or a combination of both."
"singlecell maldi mass spectrometry imaging msi of lipids and metabolites 200 da has recently come to the forefront of biomedical research and chemical biology but fast metabolomepreserving methods without paraformaldehyde fixation for analysis of low mass hydrophilic metabolites 200 da in large cell populations are lacking.
introducing giant unilamellar vesicles guvs as msi ground truth for cellsized objects and monte carlo referencebased consensus clustering for datadependent identification of cell subpopulations.
the prismms prescan imaging for small molecule  mass spectrometry dualscan msi workflow is presented enabling spaceefficient and therefore faster lipid analysis in single guvs and cells.
beyond lipids prismms enables msi and oncell ms2based identification of lowmass metabolites like amino acids or krebs cycle intermediates involved in stimulusdependent cell activation.
the utility of prismms is demonstrated through the characterization of complex metabolome changes in lipopolysaccharide lpsstimulated microglial cells and humaninduced pluripotent stem cellderived microglia.
translation of single cell results to endogenous microglia in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures indicates that lpsactivation involves changes of the itaconatetotaurine ratio and alterations in neurontoglia glutamineglutamate shuttling.
the data suggests that prismms could serve as a standard method in single cell metabolomics given its capability to characterize larger cell populations and lowmass metabolites."
"epimutations modify gene expression and lead to phenotypic variation although the encoding dna sequence remains unchanged.
epimutations mediated by rna interference rnai andor chromatin modifications can confer antifungal drug resistance and may impact virulence traits in fungi.
however whether these epigenetic modifications can be transmitted across generations following sexual reproduction was unclear.
this study demonstrates that rnai epimutations conferring antifungal drug resistance are transgenerationally inherited in the human fungal pathogen mucor circinelloides.
our research reveals that rnaibased antifungal resistance follows a dna sequenceindependent nonmendelian inheritance pattern.
small rnas srnas are the exclusive determinants of inheritance transmitting drug resistance independently of other known repressive epigenetic modifications.
unique srna signature patterns can be traced through inheritance from parent to progeny further supporting rna as an alternative molecule for transmitting information across generations.
this study marks a significant advance in understanding epigenetic inheritance highlighting rnaiexclusive epimutations as a widespread phenomenon in the pathogenic m. circinelloides species complex.
understanding how epimutations occur propagate and confer resistance may enable their detection in other eukaryotic pathogens provide solutions for challenges posed by rising antimicrobial drug resistance amr and also advance research on phenotypic adaptability and its evolutionary implications."
"influenza neuraminidase is a crucial target for protective antibodies but development of recombinant neuraminidase protein as a vaccine has been held back by instability and variable expression.
we have taken a pragmatic approach to improving expression and stability of neuraminidase by grafting antigenic surface loops from lowexpressing neuraminidase proteins onto highexpressing strains.
we generated hybrid proteins bearing the antigenic properties of the loop donor accompanied by the favourable expression stability and tetrameric structure of the loop recipient.
the hybrid neuraminidase proteins were recognised by a broad set of human monoclonal antibodies induced by influenza infection or vaccination and grafted loops were superposable in their xray structures.
immunisation of mice with neuraminidase hybrids induced inhibitory antibodies to the loop donor and protected against lethal influenza challenge.
this pragmatic technique enables improved expression of influenza neuraminidase proteins for vaccine manufacture."
"the obligate intracellular bacterium chlamydia alternates between two functional forms during its developmental cycle elementary body eb and reticulate body rb.
however the molecular mechanisms governing the transitions between these forms are unknown.
here we present evidence cyclic diamp cdiamp is a key factor in triggering the transition from rb to eb i.e.
secondary differentiation in the chlamydial developmental cycle.
by overexpressing or knocking down expression of cdiamp synthase genes we made strains producing different levels of cdiamp which we linked to changes in secondary differentiation status.
increases in cdiamp resulted in an earlier increase in transcription of ebassociated genes and this was further manifested in earlier production of ebs.
in contrast when cdiamp levels were decreased secondary differentiation was delayed.
based on these data we conclude there is a threshold level of cdiamp needed to trigger secondary differentiation in chlamydia.
this is the first study to identify a mechanism by which secondary differentiation is initiated in chlamydia and reveals a critical role for the second messenger signaling molecule cdiamp in this process."
"pterin pigments are responsible for many of the bright colours observed across the animal kingdom.
however unlike melanin the genetics of pterinbased pigmentation has received relatively little attention in animal colouration studies.
here we investigate a lineage of axanthic ball pythons"
"the study of cetacean size and growth aids in research about their energetics ecology evolution and taxonomy.
data on total body length and weight of large cetaceans is retained in an overwhelming amount of literature and previous reviews are limited in discussing the variation of both length and weight.
nearly all the known published literature was examined to provide a brief but comprehensive summary of the adult size of four large odontocetes.
to supplement the existing literature data from the international whaling commission catch database were reviewed and incorporated into analyses to improve descriptions of intraspecific variation in adult size for"
 lead contact
"background public health resources are often allocated based on reported disease cases.
however for lesserknown infectious diseases such as tickborne viruses disease risk reporting should account for more than just the biology of the disease and include mediating factors such as socioeconomics which can determine if an infection gets reported.
objectives we aim to identify countrylevel ecological and socioeconomic factors important to reporting tickborne viruses and examine whether countries with more economic resources have a higher likelihood of reporting resource intensive incidences.
our study goals are to determine potential countrylevel interventions that could enhance recognition of and reduce the health burden associated with tickborne viruses.
methods we apply machine learning to the most comprehensive tickborne virus database zover with a curated global trait matrix of 23 environmental and socioeconomic predictors.
results we identified socioeconomic factors driving reported tickborne viruses captured in the database at a country level.
countries that were more likely to report tickborne viruses had a lower gini index i.e.
countries with less inequalities such as nordic countries increased dollars spent on pesticide imports and had institutions i.e.
ivsa chapter or individuals with agricultural forestry or veterinary knowledge i.e.
of tertiary grads present.
additional characteristics included countries with a lower percent of population exposed to conflict also had a higher probability of reporting a tickborne virus.
as expected broad environmental factors such as the koeppengeiger climate classification zone was important and identified mediterranean climate or humid subtropical climate as environmentally suitable zones for reported tickborne viruses.
discussion for environmentally persistent pathogens the role of ancillary factors mediating reporting must be considered for allocating resources to interventions.
in addition while direct interruption of transmission is important socioeconomic interventions may be the greatest tool to reduce local disease burden."
"obesity is a complex chronic disease characterized by excessive adiposity and associations with numerous comorbidities including cancer.
despite extensive research we have limited understanding of the mechanisms coupling obesity to cancer risk and of the contexts in which obesity does or does not exacerbate disease.
here we show that chronic highfat diet hfdinduced obesity has no significant effect on the"
"throughout evolution the placenta has diversified in both structure and cellular composition while maintaining its fundamental function.
trophoblasts are fetalderived cells responsible for nourishing and protecting the developing fetus and are a universal component of all placentas.
while primate placentas exhibit many shared morphological features speciesspecific differences in gene expression remain largely unexplored primarily due to the lack of suitable"
"background tongue squamous cell carcinoma tscc is an aggressive cancer associated with a poor prognosis and limited treatment options necessitating new drug targets to improve therapeutic outcomes.
our current work focuses on protein tyrosine kinases as wellknown targets for successful cancer therapies.
methods western blot analysis of tyrosine phosphorylation patterns in 34 tscc lines identified src family kinases sfks as the main contributors.
inhibition of sfks with pp2 and dasatinib led to profound biological effects.
a highthroughput screen with 1600 fdaapproved drugs was performed with three tscc lines to discover drugs that act synergistically with dasatinib against tscc cell viability.
glucocorticoids emerged as potential candidates and were further investigated in 2d culture and by 3d soft agar colony formation.
dexamethasone was chosen as the major tool for our analyses.
since dasatinib and glucocorticoids are known for their pleiotropic actions on cells we analyzed effects on cell cycle senescence autophagy and cell signaling.
results a panel of 34 tscc lines showed a surprisingly homogenous ptyrprotein pattern and a prominent 130 kda ptyrprotein.
inhibition of sfk activity greatly reduced overall ptyrprotein levels and p130cas tyrosine phosphorylation.
it also impaired tscc viability in 2d cell culture and 3d soft agar colony formation.
a highthroughput drug combination screen with dasatinib identified glucocorticoids as promising candidates for synergistic activity.
dasatinib and dexamethasone combination treatment showed strong synergistic effects on src and p130cas phosphorylation and led to reduced p130cas expression.
dexamethasone also suppressed phosphorylation of the met kinase and its key substrate gab1.
on the cellular level dasatinib combination with glucocorticoids led to g1 cell cycle arrest increased senescence and enhanced autophagy.
this was also reflected by effects on cell cycle regulatory proteins including cdks and cyclins.
conclusion this work is the first to show a strong synergistic activity of dasatinib in combination with clinically used glucocorticoids in solid tumors.
furthermore the tyrosine kinase met and its effector protein gab1 are newly identified glucocorticoid targets.
given the extensive research on met as a drug target in various cancers our findings have the potential to advance future cancer treatments.
keywords tongue squamous cell carcinoma combination therapy targeted therapy glucocorticoids src family kinases."
abstract
" sterile insect technique sit incompatible insect technique iit and a combination become the alternative promising vector control approaches.
in these approaches the targeted mosquitoes need to be sterilized and released.
so far the irradiation of mosquitoes has been conducted at the pupae or adult stages.
in this study we investigated the possibility of the xray irradiation at the egg stage and also assessed the effect on the development and sterility of both wildtype and  transinfected  mosquito vectors."
"kinship is a major determinant of affiliative and mating behavior in primates.
in field studies identifying kin typically relies in part on genetic analysis especially for discriminating paternal relationships.
such analyses assume knowledge of mendelian inheritance genotyping technologies and basic statistical inference.
consequently they can be difficult for students to grasp particularly through traditional lecture formats.
here we investigate whether integrating an additional active learning approach—interaction with a shiny web application which implements a popular paternity inference approach in an accessible graphical user interface—improves student understanding of genetic kinship analysis in molecular primatology.
we do so in the context of a nontraditional learning environment in kenya a developing nation in which students have limited access to technology and where the efficacy of educational shiny apps has never been assessed.
twentyeight 28 participants with diverse educational backgrounds attended an introductory lecture on genetics and paternity inference completed a pretest interacted with  via a structured set of exercises and questions and then completed a posttest and survey about their experience and subjective understanding.
posttest scores significantly improved relative to pretest scores pvalue3.75 × 10 .
further student interest and confidence in the subject matter significantly increased after the practical session with .
our results suggest that shiny web appbased active learning approaches have potential benefits in communicating complex topics in molecular primatology including in resourcelimited settings where such methods have not yet experienced high penetrance."
"human cognition is distinguished by our ability to adapt to different environments and circumstances.
yet the mechanisms driving adaptive behavior have predominantly been studied in separate asocial and social contexts with an integrated framework remaining elusive.
here we use a collective foraging task in a virtual minecraft environment to integrate these two fields by leveraging automated transcriptions of visual field data combined with highresolution spatial trajectories.
our behavioral analyses capture both the structure and temporal dynamics of social interactions which are then directly tested using computational models sequentially predicting each foraging decision.
these results reveal that adaptation mechanisms of both asocial foraging and selective social learning are driven by individual foraging success rather than social factors.
furthermore it is the degree of adaptivityof both asocial and social learningthat best predicts individual performance.
these findings not only integrate theories across asocial and social domains but also provide key insights into the adaptability of human decisionmaking in complex and dynamic social landscapes."
"the gle1 protein is an enigmatic factor of rna processing associated with multiple developmental disorders including lethal congenital contracture syndrome 1 lccs1.
using in vivo genetic engineering to study disturbed gle1 functions under physiological conditions we demonstrate that inactivation of gle1 impedes cellular function and organization and causes pregastrulation lethality due to defects in adhesion and lineage specification.
in contrast the knockin mice genocopying lccs1associated gle1finmajor variant gle1pfqpfq survive prenatal period but die suddenly at midadulthood.
gle1pfqpfq mice present irregular count and distribution of spinal motor neurons and impaired development of neural crestderived tissues as demonstrated by defects in their sympathetic innervation of heart ventricles paravertebral sympathetic ganglia volume and adrenal chromaffin cell counts.
unlike previously reported for yeast and hela cells analysis of molecular consequences of gle1finmajor variant identified normal polya rna distribution in gle1pfqpfq cells which however were impaired in rna and protein synthesis and simultaneously showed typical signs of cellular senescence.
gle1pfqpfq also induced disturbed stress responses with significant changes in g3bp1positive stress granule count.
our results show necessity of gle1 functions for life and indicate that lccs1 etiology is resultant of pathogenic gle1finmajor variant impinging differentiation of neural crest derivatives and leading to complex multiorgan defects."
"photorespiration causes a significant decrease in crop yield due to mitochondrial decarboxylation.
alternative pathways aps have been designed to relocate the decarboxylating step or even fix additional carbon.
to improve the success of transferring those engineered aps from model species to crops we must understand how they will interact with metabolism and how the plant physiology affects their performance.
here we used multiple mathematical modelling techniques to analyse and compare existing ap designs.
we show that carbonfixing aps are the most promising candidates to replace native photorespiration in major crop species.
our results demonstrate the different metabolic routes that aps employ to increase yield and which plant physiology can profit most from them.
we anticipate our results to guide the design of new aps and to help improve existing ones."
"the bond graph approach has been recognised as a useful conceptual basis for understanding the behaviour of living entities modelled as a system with hierarchical interacting parts exchanging energy.
one such behaviour is oscillation which underpins many essential biological functions.
in this paper energybased modelling of biochemical systems using the bond graph approach is combined with classical feedback control theory to give a novel approach to the analysis and potentially synthesis of biochemical oscillators.
it is shown that oscillation is dependent on the interplay between"
"cytokinesis is a key process in the development of multicellular organisms through both formative and proliferative divisions.
in land plants successful cytokinesis requires precise targeting of golgiderived vesicles to the future division plane by the phragmoplast a cytoskeletal structure that undergoes continuous remodelling.
endomembrane trafficking and phragmoplast remodelling are tightly coupled indicating the existence of active crosstalk.
however although many molecular regulators of membrane trafficking and cytoskeletal organisation are known it remains poorly understood how these processes are coordinated.
here we describe a regulatory module consisting of the membraneassociated gtpase raba2a cytoskeletonassociated class ii kinesin12s and the fused kinase orthologue tio.
we provide evidence that the interaction between these molecules at the midzone is essential for cytokinesis in arabidopsis through simultaneously targeting to the midzone and coupling phragmoplast remodelling to vesicle delivery."
"the flora and fauna of island systems especially those in the indopacific are renowned for their high diversification rates and outsized contribution to the development of evolutionary theories.
the total diversity of geographic radiations of many indopacific fauna is often incompletely sampled in phylogenetic studies due to the difficulty in obtaining single island endemic forms across the pacific and the relatively poor performance of degraded dna when using museum specimens for inference of evolutionary relationships.
new methods for production and analysis of genomewide datasets sourced from degraded dna are facilitating insights into the complex evolutionary histories of these influential island faunas.
here we leverage whole genome resequencing 20x average coverage and extensive sampling of all taxonomic diversity within"
"the potentiality of citric acid on economy is high because of its multipurpose uses particularly in the food and pharmaceutical industries.
bangladesh spent more than million us dollars to import citric acid mostly from india and china.
its consumption is increasing 3.5 to 4 annually indicating the need for better manufacturing alternatives.
globally citric acid is primarily produced through microbial fermentation with aspergillus niger.
to support the massive scale of production of citrate the manufacturing process must be ecofriendly which should be inexpensive and available raw materials for maintaining high yielding in a costeffective manner.
in bangladesh prospective the current study has undertaken to optimize citric acid production using one of the most abundant raw materials sugarcane molasses.
moreover the aim of this study was to determine the optimum conditions to produce citric acid from sugarcane molasses using aspergillus niger f81 by submerged fermentation.
the amount of citric acid production was determined by marier boulet colorimetric method.
the optimization data suggested that 10 substrate from processed cane molasses 4 inoculum size of a. niger and initial ph 6.0 allowed to produce around 25.8 gl citric acid.
further study is warranted to assess the feasibility of citrate production in an industrial level as well as improvement of microbial strains is needed to further enhance citric acid production."
" to combat the alarming rise of neuropsychiatric diseases like schizophrenia new drugs with fewer side effects have to be identified and characterized for the symptomatic treatment of scz.
positive symptoms associated with scz are hallucinations and delusions mainly due to the overactivation of the d2 dopaminergic receptors in the cortical pathways.
d2 receptor antagonists identified from  are employed for controlling positive symptoms."
"coral reefs are experiencing unprecedented loss in coral cover due to increased incidence of disease and bleaching events.
thus understanding mechanisms of disease susceptibility and resilience which vary by species is important.
in this regard untargeted metabolomics serves as an important hypothesisbuilding tool enabling delineation of molecular factors underlying disease susceptibility or resilience.
in this study we characterize metabolomes of four species of visually healthy stony corals including"
"cell division orientation which is key to cell fate and shaping tissues is influenced by mechanical forces.
for example in uniaxially stretched tissue most divisions orient along the stretch axis.
this mechanosensitive division orientation can be achieved by distinct mechanisms involving a direct response to force or an indirect response to force via cell shape changes.
cells also generally align divisions along their long axis of interphase shape.
since stretching a tissue elongates cells uncoupling whether divisions orient in response to force or to cell shape remains challenging.
here we utilised the xenopus laevis embryonic animal cap tissue to which a reproducible external stretch can be applied to understand mechanosensitive division orientation.
we focused on nuclear mitotic apparatus protein numa which is key to spindle orientation.
we show that numa is dynamically localised to the cell cortex earlier during mitosis in uniaxially stretched tissues.
this temporal cortical recruitment of numa coincides with the onset and subsequent stretchinduced amplification of spindle oscillations.
additionally we show that knockdown of numa reduces spindle oscillations and disrupts division orientation according to stretch and cell shape.
we also show that divisions dynamically align with cell shape under tissue stretch and that this involves a direct response to force via numa localisation rather than an indirect response to force via cell shape changes.
overall using live tissue imaging mathematical modelling and tissue mechanics our results indicate that numa fine tunes spindle dynamics and ensures the accurate alignment of divisions with cell shape and anisotropic tension."
"the interactions between tumor and the immune system are main factors in determining cancer treatment outcomes.
in chronic myeloid leukemia cml considerable evidence shows that the dynamics between residual leukemia and the patient’s immune system can result in either sustained disease control leading to treatmentfree remission tfr or disease recurrence.
the question remains how to integrate mechanistic and datadriven models to support prediction of treatment outcomes.
starting from classical ecological modeling concepts which allow to explicitly account for immune interactions at the cellular level we incorporate timecourse data on natural killer nk cell number function and their tumorinduced suppression into a model of cml treatment.
we identify relevant time scales governing treatment and immune response enabling refined model calibration using tumor and nk cell time courses from different datasets.
while the model successfully describes patientspecific response dynamics critical parameters for predicting treatment outcome remain uncertain.
however by explicitly incorporating tumor load changes in response to tki dose alterations these parameters can be estimated and used to derive model predictions for treatment cessation.
further exploring dynamic changes in the number of functional immune cells we suggest specific measurement strategies of immune effector cell populations to enhance prediction accuracy for cml recurrence following treatment cessation.
the generalizability and flexibility of our approach represent a significant step towards quantitative personalized medicine that integrates tumorimmune dynamics to guide clinical decisions and optimize dynamic cancer therapies."
"endogenous phospholipids influence the conformational equilibria of g proteincoupled receptors regulating their ability to bind drugs and form signaling complexes.
however most studies of gpcrlipid interactions have been carried out in mixed micelles or lipid nanodiscs.
though useful these membrane mimetics do not fully replicate the physical properties of native cellular membranes associated with large assemblies of lipids.
we investigated the conformational equilibria of the human a adenosine receptor aar in phospholipid vesicles using f solidstate magic angle spinning nmr ssnmr.
by applying an optimized sample preparation workflow and experimental conditions we were able to obtain fssnmr spectra for both antagonist and agonistbound complexes with sensitivity and line widths closely comparable to those achieved using solution nmr.
this facilitated a direct comparison of the a2aar conformational equilibria across detergent micelle lipid nanodisc and lipid vesicle preparations.
while antagonistbound aar showed a similar conformational equilibria across all membrane and membrane mimetic systems the conformational equilibria of agonistbound a"
"administration of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ssris is associated with a reduced cancer risk and shows significant antitumor effects across multiple tumor types suggesting the potential for repurposing ssris in cancer therapy.
nonetheless the specific molecular target and mechanism of action of ssris remain to be fully elucidated.
here we reveal that citalopram exerts an immunedependent antitumor effects in hepatocellular carcinoma hcc.
interestingly the antihcc effects of citalopram are not reliant on its conventional target the serotonin transporter.
through various drug repurposing approaches including global reverse gene expression profiling drug affinity responsive target stability assay and molecular docking the complement component 5a receptor 1 c5ar1 is identified as a new target of citalopram.
c5ar1 is predominantly expressed by tumorassociated macrophages tams and citalopram treatment enhances local macrophage phagocytosis and elicits cd8 t antitumor immunity.
at a systemic level citalopram treatment results in decreased serum 5ht levels which correlates with increased activation of cd8 t cells.
additionally citalopram promotes αcd3αcd28stimulated cd8 t cell activation expansion and cytotoxicity.
depletion of cd8 t cells partially hinders the antihcc effects of citalopram.
collectively our study reveals multiple immunomodulatory roles of citalopram in inducing antitumor immunity and provides a basis for considering the repurposing of ssris as promising anticancer agents for hcc treatment."
"african swine fever asf is a viral hemorrhagic disease of swine that is reportable to the world organisation for animal health.
since 2007 asf has been expanding globally and caused severe disruption to the global swine industry.
in 2021 asf was detected in the dominican republic prompting an emergency response from local and international officials.
nearly three years later asf is still present in the country despite control efforts.
this study used data from january 2023march 2024 from governmentmandated sampling of commercial farms a newly initiated active surveillance program of backyard farms and passive reports to provide a comprehensive and descriptive assessment of asf in the dominican republic.
the attack rate for each region was calculated and the reproductive ratio r0 was estimated using the doubling time method.
asf continues to be distributed throughout the dominican republic with lower attack rates in central regions and r0 nearing 1. these results suggest that asf in the country is reaching a stable state that does not resemble an epidemic situation.
this may suggest the need to change from an approach of emergency response to one of sustained and progressive control ultimately for the longterm goal of asf eradication in the dominican republic."
"the ability to distinguish between individuals is crucial for social species and supports behaviors like reproduction hierarchy formation and cooperation.
in rodents social discrimination relies on memory and recognition of individualspecific cues known as individual signatures.
while olfactory signals are central other sensory cues  such as auditory visual and tactile inputs  also play a role.
however little research has explored the fine discrimination of individuals with overlapping cues such as siblings or cohabitating mice.
this study investigates whether mice can discriminate between two closely related individuals siblings from the same litter and cage.
we tested the hypothesis that it would be more challenging for mice to distinguish between siblings than between unrelated mice due to shared cues.
moreover social cognitive impairments are common in neurodegenerative diseases like alzheimers disease ad where difficulties in recognizing faces and voices progressively disrupt social interactions in patients.
using a mouse model of ad tg2576 known for the progressive onset of cognitive deficits we assessed whether the ability to discriminate between siblings is preserved in presymptomatic animals.
thus we first demonstrated that male and female c57bl6j mice can discriminate siblings regardless of sex.
then we revealed that presymptomatic 3monthold tg2576 mice exhibit impairments in subtle social memory while their general social memory remains unaffected.
hence we demonstrate that the inability to perform fine social discrimination is an early cognitive impairment that arises before other welldocumented memory abnormalities in this ad mouse model."
"the origin of eukaryotes remains a central enigma in biology.
ongoing debates agree on the pivotal role of a symbiosis between an alphaproteobacterium and an asgard archaeon.
however the involvement of other bacterial partners as significant donors of genetic material or the role of interactions with viruses remain contentious.
to address these questions we employed advanced phylogenomic approaches and comprehensive datasets spanning the known diversity of cellular life and viruses.
our analysis provided an updated reconstruction of the last eukaryotic common ancestor leca proteome in which we traced the phylogenetic origin of each protein family.
we found compelling evidence for multiple waves of horizontal gene transfer from diverse bacterial and viral donors with some likely preceding the mitochondrial endosymbiosis.
we inferred the proteomes of the potential major donors and their functional contributions to leca.
our findings underscore the contribution of horizontal gene transfers in shaping the proteomes of preleca ancestors and hint to a facilitating role of nucleocytoviricota viruses.
altogether our results suggest ancient eukaryotes originated within complex microbial ecosystems through a succession of symbiotic interactions that left a footprint of horizontally transferred genes."
"the sarscov2 jn.1 variant ba.2.86.1.1 arising from ba.2.86.1 with spike protein s substitution sl455s outcompeted the previously predominant xbb lineages by the beginning of 2024. subsequently jn.1 subvariants including kp.2 jn.1.11.1.2 and kp.3 jn.1.11.1.3 which acquired additional s substitutions e.g.
sr346t sf456l and sq493e have emerged concurrently.
as of october 2024 kp.3.1.1 jn.1.11.1.3.1.1 which acquired s31del outcompeted other jn.1 subvariants including kp.2 and kp.3 and is the most predominant sarscov2 variant in the world.
thereafter xec a recombinant lineage of ks.1.1 jn.13.1.1.1 and kp.3.3 jn.1.11.1.3.3 was first identified in germany on august 7 2024. xec acquired two s substitutions st22n and sf59s compared with kp.3 through recombination with a breakpoint at genomic position 2173822599. we estimated the relative effective reproduction number re of xec using a bayesian multinomial logistic model based on genome surveillance data from the usa the united kingdom france canada and germany where this variant has spread as of august 2024. in the usa the re of xec is 1.13fold higher than that of kp.3.1.1.
additionally the other countries under investigation herein showed higher re for xec.
these results suggest that xec has the potential to outcompete the other major lineage including kp.3.1.1.
we then assessed the virological properties of xec using pseudoviruses.
pseudovirus infection assay showed that the infectivity of kp.3.1.1 and xec was significantly higher than that of kp.3.
although st22n did not affect the infectivity of the pseudovirus based on kp.3 sf59s significantly increased it.
neutralization assay was performed using three types of human sera convalescent sera after breakthrough infection bti with xbb.1.5 or kp.3.3 and convalescent sera after jn.1 infection.
in all serum groups xec as well as kp.3.1.1 showed immune resistance when compared to kp.3 with statistically significant differences.
in the cases of xbb.1.5 bti sera and jn.1 infection sera the 50 neutralization titers nt50s of xec and kp.3.1.1 were comparable.
however we revealed that the nt50 of xec was significantly 1.3fold lower than that of kp.3.1.1.
moreover both st22n and sf59s significantly 1.5fold and 1.6fold increased the resistance to kp.3.3 bti sera.
here we showed that xec exhibited higher pseudovirus infectivity and higher immune evasion than kp.3.
particularly xec exhibited more robust immune resistance to kp.3.3 bti sera than kp.3.1.1.
our data suggest that the higher re of xec than kp.3.1.1 is attributed to this property and xec will be a predominant sarscov2 variant in the world in the near future."
"the present study has successfully obtained genetic information that allow the identification from direct descendants of christopher columbus dating from 1526 to 1734. this represents the first achievement of this unique objective.
the results obtained from the analysed samples characterized by their significant antiquity yield exceptional insights into forensic genetics and its newest protocols and methodologies applied to the study of ancient skeletal remains.
this work presents the preliminary results of the whole family study using massive parallel sequencing focusing on the autosomal single nucleotide polymorphism snp and short tandem repeats str markers including their flanking region sequences as well as ancestry informative markers aims of the greatgreatgrandson of the discoverer.
the results of this project pave the way towards the application of new sequencing technologies for the study of genetic evolution biogeographical origins and forensic identification of historical characters."
"bond graphs provide an energybased methodology for modelling complex systems in a hierarchical fashion at the moment the method allows biological system with both chemical and electrical subsystems to be modelled.
herein the bond graph approach is extended to include chemomechanical transduction thus extending the range of biological systems to be modelled.
actin filament polymerisation and force generation is used as an example of chemomechanical transduction and it is shown that the tf transformer bond graph component provides a practical and conceptually simple alternative to the brownian ratchet approach of peskin odell oster  mogilner.
furthermore it is shown that the bond graph approach leads to the same equation as the brownian ratchet approach in the simplest case.
the approach is illustrated by showing that flexibility and nonnormal incidence can be modelled by simply adding additional bond graph components and that compliance leads to nonconvexity of the forcevelocity curve.
energy flows are fundamental to life for this reason the energy based approach is utilised to investigate the power transmission by the actin filament and its corresponding efficiency.
the bond graph model is fitted to experimental data by adjusting model physical parameters."
"using a restricted set of behavioral responses corals must obtain sufficient light to maximize photosynthesis while simultaneously avoiding predation and molecular damage from uv radiation.
this study investigates the polyp behavioral response of the caribbean octocoral  to shading and how this response influences reactions to a simulated predator cue.
in experiment i we measured changes in polyp extension before and after a shade structure was placed over colonies on a shallow patch reef in the florida keys.
in experiment ii changes in polyp extension were measured following a simulated predator cue for both shaded and unshaded colonies.
experiment i demonstrates that  possesses a mechanism for detecting changes in light intensity and responds by manipulating the extension of its polyps.
following polyp retraction due to a predator cue in experiment ii the temporal pattern of polyp reextension differed between shaded and nonshaded colonies and at the end of the observation period shaded colonies had a greater proportion of extended polyps than nonshaded colonies consistent with the results of experiment i. this research provides novel and valuable insights into the behavior of a common and important caribbean octocoral and will serve as a foundation for future research pertaining to the physiological processes involved."
"microbes can be engineered to detect target chemicals but when they operate in realworld environments it remains unclear how competition with natural microbes affect their performance over long time periods.
we engineered sensors and memorystoring genetic circuits inside"
"recent studies show that the dysregulation of the transcription factor sox10 is essential for development and progression of melanoma.
micrornas mirnas can regulate the expression of transcription factors at the posttranscriptional level.
the interactions between sox10 and its targeting mirnas form network motifs such as feedforward and feedback loops.
such motifs can result in nonlinear dynamics in gene expression levels therefore playing a crucial role in regulating tumor proliferation and metastasis as well as tumor’s responses to therapies.
here we reviewed and discussed the intricate interplay between sox10 and mirnas in melanoma biology including melanogenesis phenotype switch and therapy resistance.
additionally we investigated the gene regulatory interactions in melanoma identifying crucial network motifs that involve both sox10 and mirnas.
we also analyzed the expression levels of the components within these motifs.
from a control theory perspective we explained how these dynamics are linked to the phenotypic plasticity of melanoma cells.
in summary we underscored the importance of employing a datadriven network biology approach to elucidate the complex regulatory mechanisms and identify driver network motifs within the melanoma network.
this methodology facilitates a deeper understanding of the regulation of sox10 by mirnas in melanoma.
the insight gained could potentially contribute to the development of mirnabased treatments for sox10 thereby enhancing the clinical management of this malignancy."
"molecular biology can be difficult for undergraduate students because course content is often taught using highlyabstract visual representations.
genetic concepts can be depicted with lines letters shapes and symbols and students need to engage their visual literacy skills to appropriately decipher these abstract representations.
we previously found that undergraduate course materials almost always represent chromosomes in abstract forms such as “x” shapes or straight lines with a dot for the centromere.
we hypothesized that students struggle to apply their visual literacy skills to accurately interpret these abstract representations of chromosomes which may be related to the frequentlydocumented incomplete or incorrect ideas students have about chromosome structure and function.
to explore students’ visual literacy related to representations of chromosomes we conducted 35 semistructured interviews with students who had taken at least a year of biology courses.
we asked them to sketch chromosomes interpret an abstract representation of chromosomes and use the abstract representation to answer a question about meiosis.
we found that 97 of participants 34 of 35 held conceptual errors related to chromosome structure and function.
these conceptual errors were often not evident in participants’ verbal definitions of chromosomes and were only revealed in their sketches or explanations of their sketches.
we found that participants frequently misinterpreted xshaped representations of chromosomes mistook unreplicated homologous chromosomes as separated sister chromatids and held misconceptions related to the structure and function of centromeres.
these findings have implications for how chromosomes are taught in biology courses.
we recommend that instructors explicitly discuss the conventions and norms of representing chromosomes as a pathway for increasing students’ visual literacy in molecular biology."
"methanogenesis is classically thought to be limited to strictly anoxic environments.
while oxygenated oceans are a known methane source it is argued that methanogenesis is driven by methylphosphonatedegrading bacteria or potentially is associated to zooplankton gut microbiomes rather than by methanogenic archaea.
here we show through in situ monitoring and ex situ manipulations that methane is rapidly produced by archaea in frequently oxygenated sandy sediments.
by combining biogeochemical metagenomic and culturebased experiments we show this activity is driven by aerotolerant methylotrophic methanogens methanococcoides spp.
broadly distributed in surface layers of sandy sediments providing evidence of a hidden process contributing to marine methane emissions.
moreover we show that methane emissions are driven by methylated seaweed and seagrass metabolites revealing an unexpected feedback loop between eutrophicationdriven algal blooms and greenhouse gas emissions."
"environmental stress caused by anthropogenic impacts is increasing worldwide.
understanding the ecological and evolutionary consequences for biodiversity will be crucial for our ability to respond effectively.
historical exposure to environmental stress is expected to select for resistant species shifting community composition towards more stresstolerant taxa.
concurrent with this species sorting process genotypes within resistant taxa that have the highest relative fitness under severe stress are expected to increase in frequency leading to evolutionary adaptation.
however empirical demonstrations of these dual ecological and evolutionary processes in natural communities are lacking.
here we provide the first evidence for simultaneous species sorting and evolutionary adaptation across multiple species within a natural freshwater bacterial community.
using a twophase stressor experimental design acidification preexposure followed by severe acidification in aquatic mesocosms we show that preexposed communities were more resistant than naïve communities to taxonomic loss when faced with severe acid stress.
however after sustained severe acidification taxonomic richness of both preexposed and naïve communities eventually converged.
all communities experiencing severe acidification became dominated by an acidophilic bacterium"
""
"to combat antimicrobial resistant pathogens natural predatory bacteria like bdellovibrio bacteriovorus represent potential alternatives.
b. bacteriovorus could be particularly potent as it kills a broad range of human bacterial pathogens however it remains unclear whether prey can evolve geneticallydetermined resistance against predation.
here we show that the model bacterium escherichia coli k12 consistently evolves resistance against b. bacteriovorus during experimental evolution.
selection for resistance scaled positively with predation pressure and was widespread after two cycles of predator exposure.
like antibiotics predation resistance was costly manifesting in a tradeoff between predation resistance and fitness in the absence of predators.
genetic analysis identified changes in outer membrane porin ompf as common resistance mechanism while a mutation in cell envelope lipopolysaccharidemodifying enzyme waaf was rarer but also conferred predation resistance.
our study uncovers evolutionary and mechanistic aspects of prey escape from predation generating important knowledge on predatorprey interactions and to advance sustainable treatments."
"apolipoprotein e apoe modifies human aging specifically the epsilon2 and epsilon4 alleles are among the strongest genetic predictors of longevity and alzheimers disease ad risk respectively.
however detailed mechanisms for their influence on aging remain unclear.
herein we analyzed interomic contextdependent association patterns across apoe genotypes sex and health axes in 2229 communitydwelling individuals to test apoe genotypes for variation in metabolites and metaboliteassociations tied to a previouslyvalidated metric of biological aging ba based on blood biomarkers.
our analysis supported by validation in an independent cohort identified top apoeassociated plasma metabolites as diacylglycerols which were increased in epsilon2carriers and trended higher in epsilon4carriers compared to epsilon3homozygotes despite the known opposing aging effects of the allele variants.
omics association patterns of epsilon2carriers and increased biological age were also counterintuitively similar displaying increased associations between insulin resistance markers and energygenerating pathway metabolites.
these results provide an atlas of apoerelated omic associations and support the involvement of bioenergetic pathways in mediating the impact of apoe on aging."
"the use of synthetic microbial communities syncoms engineered to form positive biofilms that prevent the settlement of harmful bacteria is emerging as a promising strategy in biotechnology particularly in reducing reliance on chemical antimicrobials.
despite this potential the rationale for selecting specific strains in syncoms and the mechanisms underlying their antagonistic effects remains insufficiently understood.
in this study we present a bottomup approach integrating livecell imaging with highthroughput analysis of multistrain biofilms across diverse scenarios.
through this method we identified beneficial strains based on their superior ability to exclude undesirable bacteria and form mixed biofilms.
notably our findings revealed that competitive strains against undesirable bacteria could also exclude other beneficial strains emphasising the need for compatibility control in syncoms design.
syncoms composed of b. velezensis and pediococcus spp.
demonstrated enhanced pathogen exclusion compared to single strains.
temporal analysis of biofilm interactions supported by mathematical models showed that pathogen exclusion was primarily driven by nutritional competition jameson effect with additional specific interference mechanisms preypredator lotkavolterra model.
furthermore preestablishing syncoms to surfaces significantly increased pathogen inhibition indicating a distinct biofilmassociated exclusion effect.
these insights offer a framework for rational syncom design and deepen our understanding of the mechanisms underpinning positive biofilm applications."
"p21 activated kinases paks are involved in a wide range of functions from the regulation of the cytoskeleton to the control of apoptosis and proliferation.
although many pak substrates identified are implicated in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton a coherent picture of the total effect of pak activation on the state of the actin cytoskeleton is unclear.
we therefore set out to observe and quantify the effect of pak inhibition on the actin cytoskeleton in greater detail.
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts inhibition of pak kinase activity either by treatment with small molecule inhibitors or overexpression of mutant pak constructs leads to the constitutive production of patches of the phosphoinositide pip3 on the ventral surface of the cell.
the formation of these patches remodels the actin cytoskeleton and polarises the cell.
from the overexpression of truncated and mutant pak constructs as well as an in vitro model of pak recruitment to small gtpases we propose that this is due to a hyper recruitment of pak and pak binding partners in the absence of pak kinase activity.
this aberrant production of pip3 suggests that the kinase activity of class i paks acts to downregulate pi3k activity further highlighting class i paks as regulators of pi3k activity and therefore the excitability of the actin cytoskeleton."
"fungal effectors play crucial roles in plant infection.
despite low sequence identity their classification into families is feasible using structural homology.
in this study we have elucidated the structures of the two effectors mycgr391409 and ztnip1 from the wheat fungal pathogen zymoseptoria tritici using xray crystallography and nmr.
these proteins shared structural homology with respectively kp6alpha and kp4 killer toxins encoded by umv dsrna viruses infecting the corn fungal pathogen ustilago maydis.
consequently ztmycgr391409 and ztnip1 were renamed ztkp61 and ztkp41.
orthologs and paralogs of ztkp61 and ztkp41 were identified in zymoseptoria species but not in other fungi with the exception of ecp2 effectors related to ztkp41.
a novel pipeline relying on foldseek and cysteinepattern constrained hmm searches identified a large number of proteins structurally related to ztkp61 and ztkp41 in fungi and to ztkp41 in plants.
these proteins were classified into distinct structural super families 4 kp4 and 3 kp6 including effectors not known as structurally related to kp4 ecp2 or kp6 bas4.
the biological activities of ztkp61 and ztkp41 were assessed on plants and fungi.
they did not induce symptoms on wheat leaves.
however they inhibited the growth of botrytis cinerea and z. tritici demonstrating their toxicity to fungi.
these results highlight the importance of structure determination of effectors for their classification and the prediction of their function."
 authors declare that they have no competing interests.
"human neurogenesis is disproportionately protracted lasting 10 times longer than in mouse allowing neural progenitors to undergo more rounds of selfrenewing cell divisions and generate larger neuronal populations.
in the human spinal cord expansion of the motor neuron lineage is achieved through a newly evolved progenitor domain called vpmn ventral motor neuron progenitor that uniquely extends and expands motor neurogenesis.
this behavior of vpmns is controlled by transcription factor nkx22 which in vpmns is coexpressed with classical motor neuron progenitor pmn marker olig2.
in this study we sought to determine the molecular basis of nkx22mediated extension and expansion of motor neurogenesis.
we found that nkx22 represses proneural gene  by two distinct notchindependent mechanisms that are respectively apparent in rodent and human spinal progenitors in rodents and chick nkx22 represses  and the motor neuron lineage through its tinman domain leading to loss of  expression.
in human vpmns however nkx22 represses  but not  thereby allowing motor neurogenesis to proceed albeit in a delayed and protracted manner.
interestingly we found that ectopic expression of tinmanmutant  in mouse pmns phenocopies human vpmns repressing  but not  and leading to delayed and protracted motor neurogenesis.
our studies identify a notch and tinmanindependent mode of mediated  repression that is observed in human spinal progenitors but is normally masked in rodents and chicks due to ’s tinmandependent repression of"
"the transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic gene expression is a critical aspect with transcription factors playing a key role by combining with cisacting elements in the promoter regions.
growth regulating factors grfs are plantspecific transcriptional factors.
the  growthregulating factor gene  when ectopically expressed in crops such as  sugar beet and  canola has an effect of accelerating shoot organogenesis and enhancing the efficiency of genetic transformation.
however an efficient plant regeneration and genetic transformation system in  l. ssp.
a major vegetable crop in china remains to be established.
in this work we identified and characterized the  ortholog in  named as  from brad database.
molecular analysis of  gene and exploration of its protein interaction network were further conducted.
therefore the promoter region of  was thoroughly examined to determine cisacting elements of various kinds and quantities.
it is expected to provide a foundation for regulation of  and a informative reference for the improvement of  transformation efficiency and molecular breeding.
keywords  l. ssp."
"glioblastoma gbm is an aggressive brain tumor with limited treatment options and a poor prognosis.
tumor treating fields ttf therapy which uses alternating electric fields to disrupt cancer cell division has emerged as a promising noninvasive treatment.
however the development and optimization of ttf systems remain challenging with limited studies detailing the design and practical application of such systems.
in this study we developed a novel ttf prototype focusing on the design and fabrication of key components such as the electrical signal regulation transmission and corresponding therapeutic effects.
we evaluated the system’s efficacy through a series of  and  experiments.
we demonstrated significant inhibition of gbm cell proliferation under varying electric field intensities with stronger fields showing greater efficacy.
studies using a rat glioblastoma model revealed reduced tumor growth increased apoptosis and enhanced immune infiltration in the ttftreated group compared to controls.
this comprehensive study provides a valuable reference for ttf system development offering insights into both the technical design and biological application of ttf therapy and highlighting its potential for improving gbm treatment outcomes."
"trim7 is an e3 ubiquitin ligase that was recently identified as a central regulator of hostviral interactions with both proviral and antiviral activity in cell culture.
as an inhibitor trim7 overexpression ubiquitinates viral proteins by recognizing cterminal glutamines that are hallmarks of 3clike protease cleavage events.
here we sought to determine the physiological impact of trim7 in resolving murine norovirus mnv infection of mice as mnv is potently inhibited by trim7 in vitro.
utilizing two independently derived trim7 deficient mouse lines we found no changes in the viral burden or tissue distribution of mnv in both an acute and persistent model of infection.
additionally no changes in cytokine responses were observed after acute mnv infection of trim7deficient mice.
furthermore removal of potentially confounding innate immune responses such as sting and stat1 did not reveal any role for trim7 in regulating mnv replication.
taken together our data fails to find a physiological role for trim7 in regulating mnv infection outcomes in mice and serves as a caution for defining trim7 as a broad acting antiviral."
" medulloblastoma mb is a pediatric brain tumor that develops in the cerebellum representing one of the most common malignant brain cancers in children.
standard treatment includes surgery chemotherapy and radiation but despite a 5year survival rate of approximately 70 these therapies often lead to significant neurological damage in the developing brain.
this underscores the urgent need for less toxic more effective therapeutic alternatives.
recent advancements in cancer immunotherapy including immune checkpoint inhibitors and cart cell therapy have revolutionized cancer treatment.
one promising avenue is the use of gamma delta γδ t cells a unique t cell population with potential advantages such as nonalloreactivity potent tumor cell lysis and broad antigen recognition.
however their capacity to recognize and target mb cells remains underexplored."
"inducible defences in response to predation risk are a wellknown example of adaptive phenotypic plasticity.
while inducible defences have been mainly studied within a generation withingenerational plasticity there is now clear evidence that the ancestral exposure to predation risk can influence the defences expressed by the offspring even if they have not been exposed themselves transgenerational plasticity.
the molecular mechanisms allowing the transmission of environmental information across generations are still misunderstood.
in this study we combined measures of antipredator responses behavioural and morphological with transcriptomic investigations across two generations in the freshwater snail physa acuta.
we hypothesised that both within and transgenerational plasticity would induce phenotypic changes associated with differential gene expression.
our results confirmed within and transgenerational plasticity f1 snails have responded to predatorcue exposure by increasing escape behaviour reducing shell length and developing thicker and slender shells and f2 from exposed parents have shown similar responses.
within and transgenerational plasticity were accompanied by the differential expression of 78 genes 77 up and 1 downregulated and 14 differentially expressed genes 13 up and 1 downregulated respectively.
within and transgenerational plasticity did not share common differentially expressed genes but some differentially expressed genes in f1 are also highly expressed in f2 and overall the molecular functions were similar involving metabolism and transcription regulation.
the quantitatively low molecular response associated with transgenerational plasticity suggests that gene expression changes induced by parental exposure may have occurred early in development and have decreased at adult stage."
"understanding the relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning stands as a cornerstone in ecological research.
extensive evidence now underscores the profound impact of species loss on the stability and dynamics of ecosystem functions.
however it remains unclear whether the loss of genetic diversity within key species yield similar consequences.
here we delve into the intricate relationship between species diversity genetic diversity and ecosystem functions across three trophic levels primary producers primary consumers and secondary consumers in natural aquatic ecosystems.
our investigation involves estimating species diversity and genomewide diversity gauged within three pivotal species within each trophic level evaluating seven key ecosystem functions and analyzing the strength of the relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functions befs.
we found that overall the absolute effect size of genetic diversity on ecosystem functions mirrors that of species diversity in natural ecosystems.
we nonetheless unveil a striking dichotomy while genetic diversity was positively correlated with various ecosystem functions species diversity displays a negative correlation with these functions.
these intriguing antagonist effects of species and genetic diversity persists across the three trophic levels underscoring its systemic nature but were apparent only when befs were assessed within trophic levels rather than across them.
this study reveals the complexity of predicting the consequences of genetic and species diversity loss under natural conditions and emphasizes the need for further mechanistic models integrating these two facets of biodiversity."
"the intricate dynamics of volatile organic compounds vocs in the human respiratory system remain poorly understood.
in the present study we integrate odor sensory tests osts coupled with computational fluid dynamics and a physiologically based pharmacokinetic cfdpbpk model to elucidate various aspects of the olfaction process.
safe yogurtderived substances were incorporated in osts to prevent harmful exposure.
acetaldehyde was identified as a key active component in determining odor intensity prompting further analysis of acetone and other four constituents of yogurt.
logarithmic correlations were established between the perceived odor intensity from the osts and both timeaveraged absorption flux and equilibrium concentration within the olfactory mucus layer.
these parameters were numerically captured enabling the logarithmic approximation of odor intensity for different breathing profiles and the development of reliable prediction models for odor sensation based on quantifiable physiological parameters.
the cfdpbpk model captured detailed spatial and temporal variations of these parameters which offers potential for future integratedinsilico applications.
minor peaks of odor concentration were observed in the posterior olfactory regions during exhalation revealing a retronasal phenomenon.
locationspecific analysis revealed the nostrils and olfactory regions as the most accurate indicators of perceived odor intensity proving the limitations of rough sensory assessments in the indoorbreathing zone scales.
acetone exhibited distinct absorption and desorption trends during the transitional phase between inhalation and exhalation owing to the physical properties diffusion and partition coefficients that strongly characterize the olfaction dynamics."
"we report a population of multipotent cells isolated from term human placentas for the first time that differentiates into cardiomyocytes and vascular cells with clonal ability migratory ability and trancriptomic evidence of immune privilege.
caudaltype homeobox2 cdx2 is a conserved factor that regulates trophectoderm formation and placentation during early embryonic development but has not previously been implicated in developmentally conserved regenerative mechanisms.
we earlier reported that murine cdx2 cells restored cardiac function after intravenous delivery in male mice with experimental myocardial infarction mi.
here we demonstrate that cdx2 cells found in human chorion are poised for cardiovascular differentiation.
we isolated cdx2 cells from term placentas of 150 healthy patients and showed that they spontaneously differentiate into cardiomyocytes functional vascular cells and retain homing ability in vitro with a transcriptome that supports enhanced cardiogenesis vasculogenesis immune modulation and chemotaxis gene signatures.
they restore cardiac function when administered to nodscid mice subjected to mi.
cdx2 cells can be clonally propagated in culture with retention of cardiovascular differentiation.
our data compels further use of this ethically feasible cell source in the design of therapeutic strategies for cardiovascular disease."
molecular detection of
"cellular cryoelectron tomography cryoet enables the capture of detailed structural information within a biologically relevant environment.
however information in more complex samples such as tissues is lacking.
importantly these observations need to be set in context of populations imaging on the molecular scale todate is limited to few observations insitu that struggle to be generalised.
this is due to limitations in throughput and versatility employed by current instrumentation.
here we utilise plasma focused ion beam milling to examine the molecular landscape of mouse hippocampus by cryoet in targeted regions across multiple individuals revealing the complex organisation of macromolecules from the ca1 strata pyramidale sp to radiatum sr. our data represent a molecular atlas producing snapshots of hippocampal architecture in adult mouse.
the combination of instrumentation and application of technical advancements provides a framework to explore specific structural questions within native tissues in a targeted manner."
"lettuce is a widely consumed raw vegetable making it crucial to understand and predict its leafassociated microbial communities for the benefit of both plant and human health.
while environmental factors are known to strongly influence plant leaf microbiomes the role of plantspecific determinants in shaping microbial diversity remains unclear.
in this study we investigated the impact of three key plant factors genetic distance morphology and leaf micro and macronutrient content on the composition and diversity of lettuce leaf bacterial communities.
using 131 fullysequenced lactuca sativa genotypes we analyzed their leafassociated bacterial communities via 16s rrna amplicon sequencing.
our findings revealed that morphological classification as defined by breeders exerts a greater influence on bacterial community diversity than genetic distance or variations in leaf nutrient levels.
together with shoot traits they explained 13.9 of the observed bacterial diversity.
further analysis of 10 specific leaf morphological traits showed that heart formation head height and venation types significantly shaped bacterial richness and evenness mainly acting on nonhub members.
the strong association between leaf morphology and bacterial community structure suggests that phenotypic traits play a disproportionately large yet understudied role in leaf microbiota establishment offering new potential for manipulation by breeders."
"cell polarity is a crucial biological process essential for cell division directed growth and motility.
in"
"apoptotic cell death is regulated by the bcl2 protein family with clusters of bak or bax homodimers driving pore formation in the mitochondrial outer membrane via a poorly understood process.
there is growing evidence that in addition to bak and bax lipids play an important role in pore formation.
towards a better understanding of the lipidic drivers of  apoptotic pore formation in isolated mitochondria two complementary approaches were taken.
firstly the lipids released during bakmediated pore formation were measured with targeted lipidomics revealing enrichment of long chain polyunsaturated lysophospholipids lpls in the released fraction.
in contrast the bak protein was not released suggesting that bak and lpls locate to distinct microdomains.
secondly added cholesterol not only prevented pore formation but prevented the clustering of bak homodimers.
our data lead us to a model in which bak clustering triggers formation of a separate microdomain rich in lpls that can progress to lipid shedding and the opening of a lipidlined pore.
pore stabilisation and growth may be due to bak dimers then moving to the pore edge.
our baklipid microdomain model supports the heterogeneity of bak assemblies and the observed lipidrelease signature gives new insight into the genesis of the apoptotic pore."
"polymicrobial communities are often recalcitrant to antibiotic treatment because interactions between different microbes can dramatically alter their responses and susceptibility to antimicrobials.
however the mechanisms of evolving antimicrobial resistance in such polymicrobial environments are poorly understood.
we previously reported that magnesium depletion caused by the fungus candida albicans can enable pseudomonas aeruginosa to acquire significant resistance to colistin a lastresort antibiotic targeting bacterial membrane.
here we dissect the genetic and biochemical basis of this increased colistin resistance.
we show that p. aeruginosa cells can acquire colistin resistance using three distinct evolutionary trajectories involving mutations in genes involved in lipid a biosynthesis lipid a modifications that are dependent on low mg2 and a putative mg2 transporter pa4824.
these mutations confer colistin resistance by altering acyl chains hydroxylation and aminoarabinose modification of lipid a moieties on the bacterial outer membrane.
in all cases enhanced colistin resistance initially depends on the low mg2responsive phopq pathway which potentiates the evolution of resistance mutations and lipid a modifications that do not occur without mg2 depletion.
however the phopq pathway is not required to maintain high colistin resistance in all cases.
in most cases the genetic and biochemical changes associated with these novel forms of colistin resistance also impair bacterial membrane integrity leading to fitness costs.
our findings provide molecular insights into how nutritional competition drives a novel antibiotic resistance mechanism and its ensuing fitness tradeoffs."
"many cellular patterns exhibit a reactiondiffusion component suggesting that turing instability may contribute to pattern formation.
however biological generegulatory pathways are more complex than simple turing activatorinhibitor models and generally do not require finetuning of parameters as dictated by the turing conditions.
to address these issues we employ random matrix theory to analyze the jacobian matrices of larger networks with robust statistical properties.
our analysis reveals that turing patterns are more likely to occur by chance than previously thought and that the most robust turing networks have an optimal size surprisingly consisting only of a handful of molecular species thus significantly increasing their identifiability in biological systems.
this optimal size emerges from a tradeoff between the highest stability in small networks and the greatest instability with diffusion in large networks.
furthermore we find that with multiple immobile nodes differential diffusion ceases to be important for turing patterns.
our findings may inform future synthetic biology approaches and provide insights into bridging the gap to complex developmental pathways."
"splicemodulating antisense oligonucleotides asos are precision rnabased drugs that are becoming an established modality to treat human disease.
previously we reported the discovery of asos that target a novel putative intronic rna structure to rescue splicing of multiple pathogenic variants of f8 exon 16 that cause hemophilia a. however the conventional approach to discovering splicemodulating asos is both laborious and expensive.
here we describe an alternative paradigm that integrates datadriven rna structure prediction and community science to discover splicemodulating asos.
using a splicingdeficient pathogenic variant of f8 exon 16 as a model we show that 25 of the topscoring molecules designed in the eterna openaso challenge have a statistically significant impact on enhancing exon 16 splicing.
additionally we show that a distinct combination of asos designed by eterna players can additively enhance the inclusion of the splicingdeficient exon 16 variant.
together our data suggests that crowdsourcing designs from a community of citizen scientists may accelerate the discovery of splicemodulating asos with potential to treat human disease."
"injuries to musculoskeletal interfaces such as the tendontobone insertion of the rotator cuff present significant physiological and clinical challenges for repair due to complex gradients of structure composition and cellularity.
advances in interface tissue engineering require stratified biomaterials able to both provide local instructive signals to support multiple tissue phenotypes while also reducing the risk of strain concentrations and failure at the transition between dissimilar materials.
here we describe adaptation of a thiolated gelatin gelsh hydrogel via selective amination of carboxylic acid subunits on the gelatin backbone.
the magnitude and kinetics of hrpmediated primary crosslinking and carbodiimidemediated secondary crosslinking reactions can be tuned through amination and thiolation of carboxylic acid subunits on the gelatin backbone.
we also show that a stratified biomaterial comprised of mineralized bonemimetic and nonmineralized tendonmimetic collagen scaffold compartments linked by an aminated gelsh hydrogel demonstrate improved mechanical performance and reduced strain concentrations.
together these results highlight significant mechanical advantages that can be derived from modifying the gelatin macromer via controlled amination and thiolation and suggest an avenue for tuning the mechanical performance of hydrogel interfaces within stratified biomaterials."
"copy number variants cnvs gains and losses of genomic sequencesare an important source of genetic variation underlying rapid adaptation and genome evolution.
however despite their central role in evolution little is known about the factors that contribute to the structure size formation rate and fitness effects of adaptive cnvs.
local genomic sequences are likely to be an important determinant of these properties.
whereas it is known that point mutation rates vary with genomic location and local dna sequence features the role of genome architecture in the formation selection and the resulting evolutionary dynamics of cnvs is poorly understood.
previously we have found that the gap1 gene in saccharomyces cerevisiae undergoes frequent and repeated amplification and selection under longterm experimental evolution in glutaminelimiting conditions.
the gap1 gene has a unique genomic architecture consisting of two flanking long terminal repeats ltrs and a proximate origin of dna replication autonomously replicating sequence ars which are likely to promote rapid gap1 cnv formation.
to test the role of these genomic elements on cnvmediated adaptive evolution we performed experimental evolution in glutaminelimited chemostats using engineered strains lacking either the adjacent ltrs ars or all elements.
using a cnv reporter system and neural network simulationbased inference nnsbi we quantified the formation rate and fitness effect of cnvs for each strain.
we find that although gap1 cnvs repeatedly form and sweep to high frequency in strains with modified genome architecture removal of local dna elements significantly impacts the rate and fitness effect of cnvs and the rate of adaptation.
we performed genome sequence analysis to define the molecular mechanisms of cnv formation for 177 cnv lineages.
we find that across all four strain backgrounds between 26 and 80 of all gap1 cnvs are mediated by origin dependent inverted repeat amplification odira which results from template switching between the leading and lagging strand during dna synthesis.
in the absence of the local ars a distal ars can mediate cnv formation via odira.
in the absence of local ltrs homologous recombination mechanisms still mediate gene amplification following de novo insertion of retrotransposon elements at the locus.
our study demonstrates the remarkable plasticity of the genome and reveals that template switching during dna replication is a frequent source of adaptive cnvs."
"torsional stress in chromatin plays a fundamental role in cellular functions influencing key processes such as transcription replication and chromatin organization.
transcription and other processes may generate and be regulated by torsional stress.
in the genome the interplay of these processes creates complicated patterns of both positive  and negative  torsion.
however a challenge in generating an accurate torsion map is determining the zerotorsion baseline signal which is conflated with chromatin accessibility.
here we introduce a highresolution method based on the intercalator trimethylpsoralen tmp to address this challenge.
we describe a method to establish the zerotorsion baseline while preserving the chromatin state of the genome.
this approach enables both highresolution mapping of accessibility and torsional stress in chromatin in the cell.
our analysis reveals transcriptiongenerated torsional domains consistent with the twinsupercoileddomain model of transcription and suggests a role for torsional stress in recruiting topoisomerases and in regulating 3d genome architecture via cohesin.
this new method provides a potential path forward for using tmp to measure torsional stress in the genome without the confounding contribution of accessibility in chromatin."
"like the sensory organs of the human inner ear the lateralline neuromasts nms of fish such as the zebrafish danio rerio contain mechanosensory hair cells hcs that are surrounded by progenitors called supporting cells.
damaged nms can quickly regenerate new hcs by expressing in the progenitors hcspecific genes such as atoh1a the master regulator of hc fate.
we used the supervised learning algorithm delay to infer regenerating nms early generegulatory network grn and identify adaptations that promote the rapid regeneration of lateralline hcs in larval zebrafish.
the central hub in the network ybox binding protein 1 ybx1 is highly expressed in hc progenitors and young hcs and can recognize dnabinding motifs in cyprinids candidate regenerationresponsive promoter elements for atoh1a.
we showed that nms from ybx1 mutant zebrafish larvae display consistent regenerationspecific deficits in hc number and initiate both hc regeneration and atoh1a expression 20  slower than in siblings.
by demonstrating that ybx1 promotes rapid hc regeneration through early atoh1a upregulation the results support delays ability to identify key temporal regulators of gene expression."
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 4 als4 is an autosomal dominant motor neuron disease that is molecularly characterized by reduced rloop levels and caused by pathogenic variants in
"during replication lagging strand lesions are initially encountered by high fidelity dna polymerase pol holoenzymes comprised of pol δ and the pcna sliding clamp.
to proceed unhindered pol δ holoenzymes must bypass lesions without stalling.
this entails dnmp incorporation opposite the lesion insertion and the 5 template nucleotide extension.
historically it was viewed that highfidelity pol holoenzymes stall upon encountering lesions activating dna damage tolerance pathways that are ultimately responsible for lesion bypass.
our recent study of 4 prominent lesions revealed that human pol δ holoenzymes support insertion andor bypass for multiple lesions and the extents of these activities depends on the lesion and pol δ proofreading.
in the present study we expand these analyses to other prominent lesions.
collectively analyses of 10 lesions from both studies reveal that the insertion and bypass efficiencies of pol δ holoenzymes each span a complete range 0 to 100. consequently the fates of pol δ holoenzymes upon encountering lesions are quite diverse.
furthermore pol δ proofreading promoted holoenzyme progression at 7 of the 10 lesions and did not deter progression at any.
altogether the results significantly alter our understanding of the replicative capacity of high fidelity pol holoenzymes and their functional roles in lesion bypass."
 this work aims to propose a robust reconstruction method exploiting shared information across shells to increase the acquisition speed of multishell diffusion mri enabling rapid tissue microstructure mapping.
"insects living in temperate regions often accumulate a large amount of glycerol during winter to avoid freezing.
this seasonal accrual of glycerol is generally produced from glycogen reserves through the pentose phosphate pathway.
an alternative pathway to produce glycerol is through glycolysis normally used for pyruvate production for eventual atp synthesis.
aside from seasonal accumulation some insects will also rapidly increase glycerol production as a shortterm response to a sudden cold event thereby increasing cold hardiness when necessary.
in the eastern spruce budworm choristoneura fumiferana this plasticity in cold hardiness is locally adapted where northern populations produce more glycerol upon cold shock.
here we investigate how glycerol is produced during the rapid plastic response to fluctuating cold conditions and whether this pathway could be a target of local adaptation.
after a period of repeated cold exposure we found evidence of increased enzyme activity and increased mrna abundance of several proteins associated with glycolysis and a downregulation in expression of glucose6phosphate dehydrogenase associated with pentose phosphate.
pyruvate production is prevented through downregulation of glyceraldehyde3phosphate dehydrogenase.
we found higher overall enzyme activity and glycerol accumulation in a northern population from alberta although there was no evidence of an interaction effect between population and cold shock treatment.
this is one the first studies to show a mechanistic basis of such plasticity in cold hardiness."
"ulcerative colitis uc is a chronic inflammatory disease of the colon.
about onethird of uc patients failed to respond to available drugs including tofacitinib a broad janus kinase jak inhibitor.
however the mechanisms underlying patient response or resistance to oral jak inhibitors remain unknown.
to elucidate the molecular and cellular pathways activated by tofacitinib in responder and nonresponder patients we generated a longitudinal singlecell rna sequence dataset profiling both immune and nonimmune cell populations from colonic biopsies of uc patients.
our analysis revealed that responders exhibited higher baseline jakstat activity while nonresponders had increased baseline nfkb pathway activation.
longitudinal comparisons showed that disease progression in nonresponders was associated with increased abundance and enhanced activation of macrophages and fibroblasts.
our data suggest that resistance to tofacitinib is mediated by the hyperactivation of myeloid cells and we identified il10dependent macrophages as a cellular subset contributing to this resistance."
" the successful production of industrially relevant natural products hinges on two key factors the cultivation of robust microbial chassis capable of synthesizing the desired compounds and the availability of reliable genetic tools for expressing target genes.
the development of versatile and portable genetic tools offers a streamlined pathway to efficiently produce a variety of compounds in wellestablished chassis organisms.
the σ  and  expression systems – adaptations of the widely used  and  regulatory systems developed in our laboratory – have shown effective regulation and robust expression of recombinant proteins in various gramnegative bacteria.
understanding the strengths and limitations of these regulatory systems in controlling recombinant protein production is essential for progress in this area."
"rnabinding proteins rbps are key regulators of gene expression.
here we introduce eupri eukaryotic proteinrna interactions — a freely available resource of rna motifs for 34736 rbps from 690 eukaryotes.
eupri includes  binding data for 504 rbps including newly collected rnacompete data for 174 rbps along with thousands of reconstructed motifs.
we reconstruct these motifs with a new computational platform — joint proteinligand embedding jple — which can detect distant homology relationships and map specificitydetermining peptides.
eupri quadruples the number of known rbp motifs expanding the motif repertoire across all major eukaryotic clades and assigning motifs to the majority of human rbps.
eupri drastically improves knowledge of rbp motifs in flowering plants.
for example it increases the number of  rbp motifs 7fold from 14 to 105. eupri also has broad utility for inferring posttranscriptional function and evolutionary relationships.
we demonstrate this by predicting a role for 12"
"skeletal muscle is a complex syncytial arrangement of an array of cell types and in the case of muscle specific cells myofibers subtypes.
there exists extensive heterogeneity in skeletal muscle functional behaviour and molecular landscape at the cell composition myofiber subtype and intramyofiber subtype level.
this heterogeneity highlights limitations in currently applied methodological approaches which has stagnated our understanding of fundamental skeletal muscle biology in both healthy and myopathic contexts.
here we developed a novel approach that combines a fluorescence based assay for the biophysical examination of the sarcomeric protein myosin coupled with samemyofiber high sensitivity proteome profiling termed single myofiber protein functionomics smpfo.
successfully applying this approach to healthy human skeletal muscle tissue we identify the integrate relationship between myofiber functionality and the underlying proteomic landscape that guides divergent but physiologically important behaviour in myofiber subtypes.
by applying smpfo to two forms of human nemaline myopathy acta1 and tnnt1 mutations we reveal significant reduction in the divergence of myofiber subtypes across both biophysical and proteomic behaviour.
collectively we develop smpfo as a novel approach to study skeletal muscle with greater specificity accuracy and resolution then currently applied methods facilitating that advancement in understanding of skm tissue in both healthy and diseased states."
"the low yield of sesame  l. compared to other oilseed crops hinders its successful commercialisation process.
sesame yield improvement using molecularbiotechnological tools involving gene manipulation is a better alternative than traditional breeding because it requires less time effort and labour.
protoplasts are plant cells devoid of the cell wall.
protoplast systems are deployed as versatile cellbased tools for tissue culture genomics transcriptomics proteomics metabolomics and epigenetics studies leading to crop improvement.
inadequate reports of sesame protoplasts restrict its potential use in this crop.
in the present study we are reporting the successful isolation and purification of sesame protoplasts from four different sesame explants hypocotyl internode leaf and hypocotylderived callus using the onestep enzymatic digestion method.
we have carefully optimised enzyme combinations digestion durations temperatures and shaking speeds for every tested explant to obtain the highest protoplast yield and viability.
maximum yield 9.9 x 10 protoplastsgm fresh weight and viability 92.1 were achieved from callus explants.
we purified isolated protoplasts by floating them over a 20 wv sucrose solution.
among tested media callusderived protoplasts divided rapidly in murashige and skoog broth medium supplemented with 17.77 μm 6benzylaminopurine bap and 0.54 μm αnaphthalene acetic acid naa.
in the same medium protoplasts divided into the 2cell stage after 23 days of culture and progressed to the microcallus stage at 0.24 ± 0.05 frequency within 1620 days of culture.
sesame protoplasts could be an excellent system for investigating potential avenues for biotechnological improvements of sesame including transient gene expression and crisprbased studies."
"impairment of desmosomal cellcell adhesion leads to several lifethreatening diseases such as the autoimmune skin blistering disorder pemphigus vulgaris pv.
disease management strategies that stabilize intercellular adhesion in addition to the existing immunosuppression therapies may result in improved clinical outcomes.
previous findings showed that the serine protease inhibitor serpinb5 promotes intercellular adhesion by binding to and regulating the localization of the desmosomal adapter molecule desmoplakin dsp at the plasma membrane.
we here show that serpinb5 overexpression prevents pviggmediated loss of cellcell adhesion and the loss of dsp from the cell membrane.
we mechanistically demonstrate that serpinb5 loss deregulates tgfβ signalling a pathway known to destabilize dsp in keratinocytes.
tgfβ signalling was also activated in skin biopsies of pv patients and keratinocytes treated with pv autoantibodies suggesting a contribution to disease.
inhibition of tgfβ activation ameliorated pviggmediated loss of cellcell adhesion increased dsp membrane expression and prevented pvigginduced blister formation in a human exvivo skin model.
together serpinb5 modulates dsp and intercellular adhesion through the regulation of tgfβ signalling.
further tgfβ signalling was identified as a potential target for pemphigus treatment."
"predicting the function of a biological structure solely from its morphology can be a very powerful tool in several fields of biology but especially in evolutionary reconstruction.
in the field of invertebrate acoustic communication reconstructing the acoustic properties of soundproducing forewings in crickets has been based on two very divergent methods finite element modelling fem and vibrometric measurements from preserved specimens.
both methods however make strong simplifying assumptions which have not been tested and the reliability of inferences made from either method remains in question.
here we rigorously test and refine both reconstruction methods using the wellknown teleogryllus oceanicus model system and determine the appropriate conditions required to reconstruct the vibroacoustic behaviour of male forewings.
we find that when using fem it is not necessary to assume simplified boundary conditions if the appropriate parameters are found.
when using preserved specimens we find that the sample needs to be rehydrated for reliable reconstruction however it may be possible to accomplish rehydration in silico using fem.
our findings provide a refined methodology for the reliable reconstruction of cricket songs whether from fossils or preserved specimens from museums or field collections."
"selfassembly a fundamental property of living matter drives the interconnected cellular organization of tissues.
synthetic cell models have been developed as bionic materials to mimic inherent cellular features such as selfassembly.
here we leverage coassembly of synthetic and natural cells to create hybrid living 3d cancer cultures.
we screened synthetic cell models including giant unilamellar vesicles coacervates microdroplet emulsions proteinosomes and colloidosomes for their ability to form hybrid tumoroids.
our results identify the balance of inter and extracellular adhesion and synthetic cell surface tension as key material properties driving successful coassembly of hybrids.
we further demonstrate that these synthetic cells can establish artificial tumor immune microenvironments arttimes mimicking immunogenic signals within tumoroids.
using the arttime approach we identify cosignaling mechanisms between pd1 and cd2 as a driver in immune evasion of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
our findings demonstrate the 3d bottomup selfassembly of hybrid cancer microenvironments to replace immune components with defined bionic materials pushing the boundaries to functionally integrating living and nonliving matter."
"perception and response to the hormone auxin is critical to plant growth and development.
expression of auxinresponse genes is tightly regulated via known mechanisms of both activation and repression.
across the plant lineage auxinresponse gene induction is performed by auxinrepsonse factor arf activating transcription factors.
conversely auxinindole acetic acid proteins repress expression.
studies of gainoffunction constitutiverepression lines and arf lossoffunction mutants have advanced the field.
yet there is a need for a comparative study of aberrant auxinsignaling mutants to understand the developmental consequences of constitutive repression versus the absence of auxinmediated gene induction.
using crisprcas9 geneediting tools we mutated each activating arf gene in the model bryophyte physcomitrium patens.
the resulting septuple lossoffunction mutant line arfasept has severe developmental phenotypes and a diminished ability to respond to exogenous auxin.
however phenotypic analysis revealed that the arfasept line is not as severely affected as the constitutiverepression lines.
expression analysis of several auxinresponse genes demonstrate that auxinmediated gene induction is abolished in both arfasept and constitutiverepression lines but that basal expression levels are higher in the arfasept lines.
our results suggest that the expression of auxinregulated genes important for developmental progression is maintained albeit at reduced levels in the absence of arfs."
"plantbased meat can help combat climate change and health risks associated with high meat consumption.
to create adequate mimics of animal meats plantbased meats must match in mouthfeel taste and texture.
the gold standard to characterize the texture of meat is the double compression test but this test suffers from a lack of standardization and reporting inconsistencies.
here we characterize the texture of five plantbased and three animal meats using texture profile analysis and rheology and report ten mechanical features associated with each products elasticity viscosity and loss of integrity.
our findings suggest that of all ten features the stiffness storage and loss moduli are the most meaningful and consistent parameter to report while other parameters suffer from a lack of interpretability and inconsistent definitions.
we find that the sample stiffness varies by an order of magnitude from 418.9±41.7kpa for plantbased turkey to 56.7±14.1kpa for tofu.
similarly the storage and loss moduli vary from 50.4±4.1kpa and 25.3±3.0kpa for plantbased turkey to 5.7±0.5kpa and 1.3±0.1kpa for tofu.
all three animal products animal turkey sausage and hotdog consistently rank in between these two extremes.
our results suggest thatwith the right ingredients additives and formulaemodern food fabrication techniques can create plantbased meats that successfully replicate the full viscoelastic texture spectrum of processed animal meat."
"progression of dna replication inevitably generates helical tension and resulting superhelical structures or supercoils that originate from the double helix of dna.
as dna polymerases progress negative supercoils accumulate in the wake of the replication fork thereby impeding fork progression unless the supercoils are resolved topologically.
using superresolution microscopy combined with spatial distribution analysis here we describe that smc56mediated confinement of negative supercoils lies at the basis of releasing them by topoisomerase top2a.
along with dna replication smc56 progressively associates with chromatin and locally increases the density of supercoil clusters behind the fork allowing top2a to efficiently target and release the accumulated supercoils.
these processes are essential to complete dna replication prior to mitosis and therefore to ensure genome stability.
remarkably we found that hela cells overaccumulate poorly confined negative supercoils beyond the processing capacity of cellular smc56 which may exemplify the condition associated with genome instability of cancer cells."
"the genomic basis of cladogenesis and adaptive evolutionary change has intrigued biologists for decades.
the unique insights gained from a genomelevel perspective have revealed a striking pattern of conserved macrosynteny within chromosomes across huge phylogenetic distances in animals yet progress in many lineages has been hampered by the absence of genomelevel data.
here we show that the tectonics of genome evolution in clitellates a clade composed of most freshwater and all terrestrial species of the phylum annelida is characterised by extensive genomewide scrambling that resulted in a massive loss of macrosynteny between marine annelids and clitellates to the point that ancient bilaterian linkage groups ie groups of genes inherited as a block in most bilaterian phyla are fully disrupted.
these massive rearrangements included the formation of putative neocentromeres with newly acquired transposable elements and preceded a further period of genomewide reshaping events including wholegenome duplications and massive macrosyntenic reshuffling between clitellate lineages potentially triggered by the loss of genes involved in genome stability and homeostasis of cell division.
notably while these rearrangements broke shortrange interactions observed between hox genes in marine annelids they were reformed as longrange interactions in clitellates.
these genomic rearrangements led to the relocation of genes and the formation of new chimeric genetic elements both of which may have contributed to the adaptation of clitellates to freshwater and terrestrial environments.
our findings provide evidence of a massive genomic reshaping within clitellates at 2d and 3d levels and suggest that synteny may not limit the structural evolution of this animal lineage.
our study thus suggests that the genomic landscape of clitellata resulted from a rare burst of genomic changes that ended a long period of stability that persists across large phylogenetic distances."
"while traits that contribute to premating sexual interactions are known to be wildly diverse much less is known about the diversity of postmating especially female reproductive traits and the mechanisms shaping this diversity.
to assess the rate pattern and potential drivers of postmating reproductive trait evolution we analyzed male and female traits across up to 30  species within a phylogenetic comparative framework.
in addition to postmating reproductive morphology e.g.
sperm length reproductive tract length and mass we also quantified mating behaviors including female remating rate—a common proxy for the strength of postmating sexual selection.
we found evidence for strong coevolution between male and female postmating traits specifically sperm length and sperm storage organ size.
however remating rate was not associated with the rate of evolution or exaggeration of either male or female postmating reproductive morphology once phylogenetic relatedness was accounted for.
we infer that femalemediated and intersexual selection predominantly drive the evolution of our postmating morphological traits including via divergent male and female interests in controlling paternity.
in comparison remating rate has a complex and likely secondary role in shaping this evolution in part because this trait can be both a driver and a product of postmating selection."
"wall teichoic acids wtas from the major grampositive foodborne pathogen  are peptidoglycanassociated glycopolymers decorated by monosaccharides that while not essential for bacterial growth are required for bacterial virulence and resistance to antimicrobials.
here we report the structure and function of a bacterial wtas rhamnosyltransferase rmlt strictly required for  wtas rhamnosylation.
in particular we demonstrated that rmlt transfers rhamnose from dtdplrhamnose to naked wtas and that specificity towards tdprhamnose is not determined by its binding affinity.
structures of rmlt with and without its substrates showed that this enzyme is a dimer revealed the residues responsible for interaction with the substrates and that the catalytic residue preorients the acceptor substrate towards the nucleophilic attack to the sugar.
additionally the structures provided indications for two potential interaction pathways for the long wtas on the surface of rmlt.
finally we confirmed that wtas glycosyltransferases are promising targets for nextgeneration strategies against grampositive pathogens by showing that inactivation of the rmlt catalytic activity results in a decreased infection"
"environmental changes often induce global variations on bacterial gene expression frequently accompanied by alterations in growth rates.
integrating nonmetabolic cellular processes such as gene expression and macromolecule synthesis with metabolic modeling remains a significant challenge in systems biology due to the lack of mechanistic representation of gene regulation.
here we introduce a novel constraintbased modeling framework called dynamic constrained allocation flux balance analysis dcafba which comprehensively integrates metabolism cellular resource allocation and gene regulation.
we employ a quasisteadystate assumption positing that reaction fluxes achieve balance at each time step adapting more rapidly than protein synthesis and growth dilution.
this approach enables the prediction of reaction flux dynamics and protein allocation necessary to achieve cellular objectives such as optimizing growth during various growth shifts including carbon amino acid and transcriptional signal without detailing molecular gene regulations.
our model offers a new method for interpreting proteome allocation and cellular metabolism in complex and transient environments providing mechanistic insights valuable for metabolic engineering."
"cellfree expression systems maintain core cellular processes without intact cells and offer attractive properties as pointofneed biosensors.
the ability to lyophilize store and use on demand make these sensors usable in the field and the lack of membranes means that there are no analyte transport issues and that new sensors can be deployed by simply adding a different dna molecule.
the lack of membranes also means that sensor designs and reaction optimizations can be screened in high throughput.
while shelf stability has been demonstrated in specific cases using additives these approaches are not universal to the myriad cellfree expression methods and formats.
here we present new highthroughput screening methods to optimize cellfree expression formulations when embedded into paper for use as sensors.
our method leverages acoustic liquid handling to dispense reactions onto 384well paper ticket formats and machine vision to quantify reaction performance from a colorimetric reporter enzyme.
the throughput enabled shifts the bottleneck from experimental execution to selecting the experiments to execute we therefore implement designofexperiments to optimize the information gained from each designbuildtestlearn cycle.
we used these approaches to first optimize the performance of a lowcost cellfree expression formulation that was initially non functional when embedded in paper then further optimize it for tolerance to exposure to heat.
with only 2 rounds of experimentation lasting 4 days total for each goal the result are an energy mixture with 8 of the materials cost of a commonly used version and a formulation of excipients that maintain 60 of activity after 6 hours of storage at 50 °c and.
finally we showcase the use of the costoptimized formulation in a 3dprinted paperfluidic device where it outperforms the standard formulation at much lower cost."
"hypertrophic cardiomyopathy hcm is a global health problem characterized by left ventricle become thick and stiff with effect of indication including chest pain fluttering fainting and shortness of breath.
in this investigation we aimed to identify diagnostic markers and analyzed the therapeutic potential of essential genes.
next generation sequencing ngs dataset gse180313 was obtained from the gene expression omnibus geo database and used to identify differentially expressed genes degs in hcm.
degs were screened using the deseq2 rbioconductor tool.
then gene ontology go and reactome pathway enrichment analyses were performed.
moreover a proteinprotein interaction ppi network of the degs was constructed and module analysis was performed.
next mirnahub gene regulatory network and tfhub gene regulatory network were constructed and analyzed.
finally diagnostic values of hub genes were assessed by  by receiver operating characteristic roc curve analysis.
by performing degs analysis total 958 degs  479 up regulated genes and 479 down regulated genes were successfully identified from gse180313 respectively.
go and reactome pathway enrichment analyses revealed that go functions  and signaling pathways were significantly enriched including response to stimulus multicellular organismal process metabolism and extracellular matrix organization.
the hub genes of fn1 sox2 tuba4a rps2 tuba1c esr1 snca lck pak1 and aplnr might be associated with hcm.
the hub gens of fn1 and tpm3 together with corresponding predicted mirnas e.g.
hsamir374a5p and hsamir8052 and sh3kbp1 and esr1 together with corresponding predicted tfs e.g prrx2 and stat3 were found to be significantly correlated with hcm.
this investigation could serve as a basis for further understanding the molecular pathogenesis and potential therapeutic targets of hcm."
"the low yield of sesame  l. compared to other oilseed crops hinders its successful commercialisation process.
sesame yield improvement using molecularbiotechnological tools involving gene manipulation is a better alternative than traditional breeding because it requires less time effort and labour.
protoplasts are plant cells devoid of the cell wall.
protoplast systems are deployed as versatile cellbased tools for tissue culture genomics transcriptomics proteomics metabolomics and epigenetics studies leading to crop improvement.
inadequate reports of sesame protoplasts restrict its potential use in this crop.
in the present study we are reporting the successful isolation and purification of sesame protoplasts from four different sesame explants hypocotyl internode leaf and hypocotylderived callus using the onestep enzymatic digestion method.
we have carefully optimised enzyme combinations digestion durations temperatures and shaking speeds for every tested explant to obtain the highest protoplast yield and viability.
maximum yield 9.9 x 10"
abstract
"the transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic gene expression is a critical aspect with transcription factors playing a key role by combining with cisacting elements in the promoter regions.
growth regulating factors grfs are plantspecific transcriptional factors.
the"
"muscle cell fusion is critical for forming and maintaining multinucleated myotubes during skeletal muscle development and regeneration.
however the molecular mechanisms directing cellcell fusion are not fully understood.
here we identify plateletderived growth factor receptor beta pdgfrβ signaling as a key modulator of myocyte fusion in adult muscle cells.
our findings demonstrate that genetic deletion of pdgfrβ enhances muscle regeneration and increases myofiber size whereas pdgfrβ activation impairs muscle repair.
inhibition of pdgfrβ activity promotes myonuclear accretion in both mouse and human myotubes whereas pdgfrβ activation stalls myotube development by preventing cell spreading to limit fusion potential.
transcriptomics analysis show that pdgfrβ signaling cooperates with tgfβ signaling to direct myocyte size and fusion.
mechanistically pdgfrβ signaling requires stat1 activation and blocking stat1 phosphorylation enhances myofiber repair and size during regeneration.
collectively pdgfrβ signaling acts as a regenerative checkpoint and represents a potential clinical target to rapidly boost skeletal muscle repair."
"bottlenose dolphins exhibit a sophisticated social structure known as a fissionfusion society.
to sustain this complex system dolphins rely on a rich vocal repertoire clicks exclusively used for echolocation burstpulse sounds associated with emotions during social interactions and whistles including signature whistles that serve as individualspecific identifiers names.
how dolphins maintain their complex social structure based only on a limited repertoire of sounds remains elusive.
previous studies suggest that contextual information can be transferred by the modulation of the whistles.
here we investigated the whistle variability using a comprehensive computational approach and studied the structure of the interactions between the whistle variants.
using a unique large dataset acquired in a natural environment we observed that signature whistles exhibit variations in their frequency contours.
unsupervised clustering revealed that signature whistles could be classified into subcategories signature whistle variants.
the existence of these categories and their independence on the emitter dolphin indicate that these variations are not random.
analysis of pairwise interactions between subcategories revealed a clustered structure similar to that of their social hierarchy.
network analysis of this structure showed that whistle subcategories had different functional roles some acted as hubs others as bridges and certain were used for turntaking between the main whistle categories.
we also found that the dolphins emit signature whistles of their deceased mothers a phenomenon only observed in human language."
"alzheimer′s disease ad disproportionately affects women yet most preclinical research studies are malecentric.
we performed lifespan analyses of male and female ad mouse models appps1 and app and their shared genetic background control c57bl6.
survival curves support significant sex differences between within genotypes.
minimal longevity revealed increased age in male appps1 and decreased age in app mice.
maximal longevity revealed an increased average age in males.
furthermore median lifespan differed between sex and genotype.
this study supports sexual dimorphic survival in two mouse models of ad emphasizing the need to examine mechanisms and treatments in both sexes."
"the fungus  the causal agent of barley scald disease contains a paralogous effector gene family called   and  .
however the function and full genomic context of these paralogs remains uncharacterised.
here we present a highly contiguous longread assembly of  wai453.
using this assembly we show that the duplication of the  and  gene families is distributed throughout the genome and predates the speciation of  from its sister species.
some  paralogs have subsequently been lost or are absent in the sister species.
the diversity of these paralogs was examined from  global populations and their expression was analysed during  and  growth to analyse the importance of these genes during infection.
the majority of  and  paralogs in wai453 genome were significantly upregulated during plant infection suggesting that the  and  genes harbour virulence roles.
an attempt to further characterise function of nip2.1 by infiltrating purified protein into barley leaves did not induce necrosis questioning its previously reported role as an inducer of host cell death.
together these results suggest that the  effector family does play a role during infection of barley however the exact function of  like many effectors remains uncharacterised."
"we focus on fine vibrations originating from tendons mechanotendography mtg as a novel method for quantifying muscle activity.
quantifying muscle activity using mtg can enable measurements in daily life and longterm continuous measurements which have been challenging for electromyography emg and mechanomyography mmg.
however the detailed trajectory of mtg increase relative to exerted muscle strength has not been clarified nor has any mechanism of mtg generation.
our research has two objectives.
the first is to clarify the detailed relationship between exerted muscle strength levels and mtg through statistical modeling.
the second is to establish a highly accurate hypothesis concerning the mechanism of mtg generation based on the modeling results and physiological knowledge.
we focused on the achilles tendon to study these two objectives.
experiments were conducted on 62 participants and mtg data were obtained at various levels of exerted muscle strength.
the obtained data were structured into a longitudinal data format representing the trajectory of mtg increase with increasing exerted muscle strength.
we used latent curve models lcm to identify this structure.
by applying various lcms to explore an optimal model we found that the quadratic lcm received the best fit for females while the piecewise linear lcm with a breakpoint at 50 exerted muscle strength received the best fit for males.
notably a significant sex difference was observed in the rate of increase in mtg at low levels of exerted muscle strength.
these results suggest that mtg is caused by fine vibrations generated by muscle fiber contractions and these fine vibrations are transmitted to the tendons connected to the muscles where they are observed.
future research will focus on verifying this hypothesis through increased time points and physiological experiments."
"the 3d point spread function of a fluorescence emitter in a living cell is often different from that of the zstack of bead images typically used as a reference.
here we show that the location in z of a fluorescent emitter can be directly accessed in the latent space of an autoencoder trained on the sample images without zreference data.
the corresponding decoding network represents an accurate point spread function."
"the manchette is a transient microtubule based structure that plays a vital role in nuclear shaping during spermiogenesis.
it comprises thousands of microtubules mts that build a scaffold around the distal half of the nucleus.
the manchette distributes proteins and vesicles during spermiogenesis in a process called intramanchette transport imt.
the current hypothesis is that imt shares many similarities with intraflagellar transport ift and utilizes both mts and filamentous actin factin.
however imt is still poorly understood as direct visualization of imt complexes is missing and the presence of factin has not been experimentally shown.
here we use proteomics and cryogenicelectron tomography cryoet to identify and visualize imt components.
we find that factin is an integral part of the manchette with two different spatial organizations namely bundles and single filaments providing tracks for transport as well as having structural and mechanical roles.
we further uncover that imt on mts is mediated by two distinct transport machineries dynein mediated transport of soluble cargo and dynein independent transport for vesicles.
our results provide new insights into the manchettes function as a transport scaffold highlighting its significance for the polarization of spermatids during spermiogenesis."
"sequencetofunction models have broad applications in interpreting the molecular impact of genetic variation yet have been criticized for poor performance in this task.
here we show that training models on functional genomic data with matched personal genomes improves their performance at variant effect prediction.
variant effect representations are retained even when transfer learning models to unseen cellular contexts and experimental readouts.
our results have implications for interpreting traitassociated genetic variation."
"the combination of parp and nampt inhibitors parpinampti has been explored for the treatment of tnbc ewing sarcoma and high grade serous carcinoma hgsc.
however dose limiting toxicity has hampered nampti in clinical trials.
to maximise the therapeutic window we set out to identify predictive genomic biomarkers.
bioinformatic analysis and screening of a panel of epithelial ovarian cancer eoc cell lines revealed that cells with raspi3k pathway mutations were sensitive to the nampti fk866.
activity of olaparib and fk866 was associated with a reduction in nicotinamide mononucleotide nmn and the parp substrate nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad with coincident increases in ros production dna damage and apoptosis induction.
caspase 37 activity was upregulated to a greater extent in raspi3k mutant cell lines.
finally the combination significantly reduced omental tumour weight and increased overall survival in mice injected with id8 trp53pten cells.
this study highlights the potential of the parpinampti combination in raspi3k pathway mutant eoc."
the vitelline warbler
" predicting the biochemical pathway involvement of a compound could facilitate the interpretation of biological and biomedical research.
prior prediction approaches have largely focused on metabolism training machine learning models to solely predict on metabolic pathways.
however there are many other types of pathways in cells and organisms which are of interest to biologists"
"biological networks provide a structured framework for analyzing the dynamic interplay and interactions between molecular entities facilitating deeper insights into cellular functions and biological processes.
network construction often requires extensive manual curation based on scientific literature and public databases a timeconsuming and laborious task.
to address this challenge we introduce neko a python package to automate the construction of biological networks by integrating and prioritizing molecular interactions from various databases.
neko allows users to provide their molecules of interest e.g.
genes proteins or phosphosites select interaction resources and apply flexible strategies to build networks based on prior knowledge.
users can filter interactions by various criteria such as direct or indirect links and signed or unsigned interactions to tailor the network to their needs and downstream analysis.
we demonstrate some of nekos capabilities in two use cases first we construct a network based on transcriptomics from medulloblastoma in the second we model drug synergies.
neko streamlines the networkbuilding process making it more accessible and efficient for researchers.
the tool is available at httpssysbiocurie.github.ioneko."
"the neonatal mouse cerebellum shows remarkable regenerative potential upon injury at birth wherein a subset of nestinexpressing progenitors neps undergoes adaptive reprogramming to replenish granule cell progenitors that die.
here we investigate how the microenvironment of the injured cerebellum changes upon injury and contributes to the regenerative potential of normally gliogenic"
"amazonia harbors one fourth of the worlds plant diversity and over 300 indigenous groups.
so far however no study has assessed how climate change may simultaneously impact its biological and cultural heritage.
to bridge this gap we assembled a database on 5833 utilized plant species and show that climate change will reduce more the ranges of utilized than of nonutilized species by 2070. locally indigenous cultures may lose an average of 65 of their utilized plant species and 50 of their associated services from climate change.
regionally the loss of threatened languages may result in a 41 reduction in the amazonian knowledge pool.
overall our results point to the strong climate vulnerability of amazonian biocultural heritage."
"rnabinding proteins rbps are key regulators of gene expression.
here we introduce eupri eukaryotic proteinrna interactions — a freely available resource of rna motifs for 34736 rbps from 690 eukaryotes.
eupri includes  binding data for 504 rbps including newly collected rnacompete data for 174 rbps along with thousands of reconstructed motifs.
we reconstruct these motifs with a new computational platform — joint proteinligand embedding jple — which can detect distant homology relationships and map specificitydetermining peptides.
eupri quadruples the number of known rbp motifs expanding the motif repertoire across all major eukaryotic clades and assigning motifs to the majority of human rbps.
eupri drastically improves knowledge of rbp motifs in flowering plants.
for example it increases the number of  rbp motifs 7fold from 14 to 105. eupri also has broad utility for inferring posttranscriptional function and evolutionary relationships.
we demonstrate this by predicting a role for 12  rbps in rna stability and identifying rapid and recent evolution of posttranscriptional regulatory networks in worms and plants.
in contrast the vertebrate rna motif set has remained relatively stable after its drastic expansion between the metazoan and vertebrate ancestors.
eupri represents a powerful resource for the study of gene regulation across eukaryotes."
"the introduction of genome engineering technology has transformed biomedical research making it possible to make precise changes to genetic information.
however creating an efficient geneediting system requires a deep understanding of crispr technology and the complex experimental systems under investigation.
while large language models llms have shown promise in various tasks they often lack specific knowledge and struggle to accurately solve biological design problems.
in this work we introduce crisprgpt an llm agent augmented with domain knowledge and external tools to automate and enhance the design process of crisprbased geneediting experiments.
crisprgpt leverages the reasoning ability of llms to facilitate the process of selecting crispr systems designing guide rnas recommending cellular delivery methods drafting protocols and designing validation experiments to confirm editing outcomes.
we showcase the potential of crisprgpt for assisting nonexpert researchers with geneediting experiments from scratch and validate the agents effectiveness in a realworld use case.
furthermore we explore the ethical and regulatory considerations associated with automated geneediting design highlighting the need for responsible and transparent use of these tools.
our work aims to bridge the gap between biological researchers across various fields with crispr genome engineering technology and demonstrate the potential of llm agents in facilitating complex biological discovery tasks."
"giant viruses of protists are a diverse and likely ubiquitous group of organisms.
here we describe jyvaskylavirus the first giant virus isolated from finland.
this clade b marseillevirus was found in  from a composting soil sample in jyväskylä central finland.
its genome shares similarities with other marseilleviruses including conserved nucleocytoviricota genes histonelike genes and three unique orfans.
helium ion microscopy and electron microscopy of infected cells unraveled stages of the jyvaskylavirus lifecycle such as single virions attached to the cell membrane likely triggering endocytosis and virusrich vesicle formation within the cytoplasm.
we also reconstructed the jyvaskylavirus particle to 6.3 å resolution using cryoem.
the 2500 å diameter virion displays structural similarities to other  giant viruses.
the capsid comprises of 9240 copies of the major capsid protein orf184 which possesses a double jellyroll fold arranged in trimers forming pseudohexameric capsomers.
below the capsid shell the internal membrane vesicle encloses the genome.
through crossstructural and sequence comparisons with other"
"there is recognition among human complextrait geneticists that not only are many common assumptions made for the sake of statistical tractability e.g.
random mating independence of parentoffspring environments unlikely to apply in many contexts but that methods reliant on such assumptions can yield misleading results even in large samples.
investigations of the consequences of violating these assumptions so far have focused on individual perturbations operating in isolation.
here we analyze widely used estimators of genetic architectural parameters including ldscore regression and both populationbased and withinfamily gwas across a broad array of perturbations to classical assumptions such as multivariate assortative mating and vertical transmission parental effects on offspring phenotypes not mediated by genetic inheritance.
we find that widelyused statistical approaches are unreliable across a broad range of perturbations and that structural sources of confounding often operate synergistically to distort conclusions.
for example mild multivariate assortative mating and vertical transmission together can dramatically inflate heritability estimates and gwas false positive rates.
further gwas will become progressively more polluted by offtarget associations as sample sizes increase.
given these challenges we introduce xftsim a forward time simulation library capable of modeling a wide range of genetic architectures mating regimes and transmission dynamics to facilitate the systematic comparison of existing approaches and the development of robust methods.
together our findings illustrate the importance of comprehensive sensitivity analysis and present a valuable tool for future research."
" functional electrical stimulation fes is used for decades in rehabilitation centers.
for patients with a spinal cord injury sci fes can prevent muscular atrophy reduce spasticity andor restore limb movements.
to this last aim fes external devices can be used but elicit imprecise movements.
fes implanted devices used neuromuscular stimulation and required implantation of one electrode for each site muscle to stimulate an heavy surgical procedure and 10 times more electrical charges than nerve stimulation.
moreover complications related to the numerous implanted components could appear over time.
the purpose of this work is to evaluate whether a multicontact nerve cuff electrode can selectively activate forearm and hand muscles and restore functional movements in patient with a complete tetraplegia."
"nodaviridae infections cause severe mortality in insects and fish with nervous necrosis virus nnv posing significant threats to global fish populations.
however the host factors involved in nnv entry remain poorly understood.
here we identify myosin light chain 3 from marine medaka oryzias melastigma mmmyl3 as a novel receptor for redspotted grouper nnv rgnnv facilitating internalization via macropinocytosis.
mmmyl3 directly binds the rgnnv capsid protein cp which dependents on the arm and s domains of cp and the efhand2 domain of mmmyl3.
in vitro experiments showed that mmmyl3 sirna protein antimyl3 antibodies or the arm domain synthetic peptides blocked rgnnv entry.
moreover in vivo administration of mmmyl3 protein also inhibited rgnnv infection.
ectopic mmmyl3 expression enabled rgnnv internalization into resistant cells.
notably mmmyl3 facilitated rgnnv internalization through the macropinocytosis pathway via the igf1rrac1cdc42 axis.
collectively our findings underscore myl3s crucial role in nnv entry and its potential as an antiviral target."
"galls induced by various organisms exhibit diverse morphological and physiological characteristics involving complex plantinsect interactions.
most transcriptome analyses to date have focused on leafderived galls.
to better understand gall formation mechanisms we investigated stemderived galls induced by the weevil smicronyx madaranus on the parasitic plant cuscuta campestris at gene expression cellular and physiological levels.
rnaseq across four developmental stages identified differentially expressed genes and associated gene ontology terms.
consistent with histological observations genes related to cell division and the cell cycle were upregulated early but decreased as the gall matured.
similar to leafderived galls we found high expression of plethora and meristemrelated homeobox genes in early gall development suggesting that stem cell induction and maintenance are involved in various gall types.
like leafderived galls the expression of genes related to floral organ development increased through the gall development.
however their expression patterns were dramatically different downstream genes in the flowering pathway were highly expressed at the initial gall stage whereas upstream genes were highly expressed later.
this suggests that the weevil might activate the flowering pathway at unconventional stages potentially rerouting the typical flowering cascade to influence gall development.
unlike the decrease in photosynthesisrelated genes in leafderived galls we observed an increase in these genes in galls formed on the stem of the holoparasitic plant.
shading experiments confirmed that photosynthesis is crucial for both gall growth and the weevil.
this study highlights how gallinducers can coopt host resources and genetic pathways offering new insights into the complexity of plantinsect interactions."
"the nexus of mobile technology mass media and public engagement is opening new opportunities for research into the human behaviours relevant to the spread of disease.
on 22 march 2018 the british broadcasting corporation bbc released the documentary “contagion the bbc four pandemic” to describe the science behind pandemic preparedness in the uk.
the authors of this article were responsible for producing a mathematical simulation for that documentary of how a highly contagious respiratory pathogen might spread across the uk.
according to the documentary narrative the ‘outbreak’ begins in the town of haslemere england.
to ground the simulation in true human interaction patterns a threeday citizen science experiment was conducted during which the pairwise distances between 469 volunteers in haslemere were tracked continuously using a mobile phone app.
here we offer a scientific companion to the documentary in which we describe the methods behind our simulation and release the pairwise interpersonal distance dataset.
we discuss salient features of the dataset including daily patterns in the clustering and volatility of interpersonal interactions.
our epidemiological analysis of the simulated haslemere outbreak serves as a springboard to discuss scientific opportunities opened by the haslemere dataset and others like it.
we believe that the haslemere dataset will productively challenge current strategies for incorporating population structure into disease transmission models and hope that it will inspire the collection and analysis of other similar datasets in the future."
"the neonatal mouse cerebellum shows remarkable regenerative potential upon injury at birth wherein a subset of nestinexpressing progenitors neps undergoes adaptive reprogramming to replenish granule cell progenitors that die.
here we investigate how the microenvironment of the injured cerebellum changes upon injury and contributes to the regenerative potential of normally gliogenic"
"psd95 is an abundant scaffolding protein that assembles multiprotein complexes controlling synaptic physiology and behavior.
confocal microscopy has previously shown that psd95 is enriched in the postsynaptic terminals of excitatory synapses and 2d superresolution microscopy further revealed that it forms nanoclusters.
in this study we utilized 3d superresolution microscopy to examine the nanoarchitecture of psd95 in the mouse brain characterizing over 8 million molecules.
while we were able to identify structural subtypes previously reported imaging in 3d allowed us to classify these with higher accuracy.
furthermore 3d superresolution microscopy enabled the quantification of protein levels revealing an abundance of psd95 molecules existed outside of synapses as a diffuse population of supercomplexes containing multiple copies of psd95.
further analysis of the supercomplexes containing two units identified two populations one that had psd95 molecules separated by 39 ± 2 nm and a second with a separation of 94 ± 27 nm.
these results suggest that psd95 supercomplexes containing multiple protein copies assemble outside the synapse and then integrate into the synapse to form a supramolecular nanocluster architecture."
the hebrew university of jerusalem  edmond j. safra campus jerusalem 9190401
"during vertebrate neurogenesis a progressive transition from symmetric proliferative to asymmetric neurogenic progenitor divisions is critical to balance growth and differentiation.
we used singlecell rnaseq data from chick embryonic neural tube to characterize the molecular mechanisms that drive this transition.
here we show that cdkn1c a key cell cycle regulator which is classically associated with neuronal cell cycle exit plays an earlier role during neurogenesis by favoring a shift towards neurogenic mode of division.
cdkn1c expression progressively increases in neural progenitors and its knock down leads to a reduction of neuron production following a shortening of cell cycle mainly attributed to a reduction in g1 duration.
clonal analysis of pairs of sister cells indicates that reducing cdkn1c expression in progenitors delays neurogenesis by favoring a symmetric proliferative mode of division.
combined cyclind1 and cdkn1c knockdowns restores the cell cycle defects and a wildtype distribution of modes of division indicating that cdkn1c acts via the regulation of cell cycle parameters.
we propose a sequential role for cdkn1c in neuron production with its progressive expression in progenitors first promoting neurogenic division patterns via cellcycle lengthening before mediating cell cycle exit in daughter cells."
"climate change and globalization are accelerating biological invasions highlighting the urgent need to understand adaptation mechanisms in invaded environments to improve management strategies.
genomic data can provide insights into the adaptation of invasive species through genotypeenvironment association gea studies identifying genes and biological processes associated with invasion success and more globally to estimate genetic maladaptation to new environments by calculating genomic offset go statistics.
in this study we investigate genetic adaptation in the invasive crop pest  using novel genomic resources and statistical methods.
we rely on a new chromosomelevel genome assembly and a dataset representing 36 populations combining both publicly available and newly generated pooled and individual sequencing data which are analyzed using an enhanced version of the baypass software tailored for such hybrid datasets.
we identify a limited number of genomic regions associated with invasion success supporting the hypothesis of a polygenic architecture of the underlying adaptive traits.
using a gea incorporating 28 environmental covariates we further estimate go between source environments and invaded areas to gain insight into the adaptive challenges faced by  during past invasions.
reciprocally we estimate go between putative source environments and geographic areas that have not yet been invaded to predict regions at risk for potential future invasions.
finally we used go calculation to identify high risk regions from which preadapted populations could likely originate.
our results suggest that the adaptive challenge for  populations to invade their current major invasion range was limited.
we also identified uninvaded regions in africa south america and australia as being at high risk of future invasion.
while further sampling and more extensive individual sequencing could refine these conclusions our study provides important insights into  adaptation and offers a generic and operational population genomics framework for studying and predicting biological invasions that can be applied to diverse species."
"solar radiation sr dynamics have a profound effect on plant growth development and ecosystems and they act as a primary energy source and important environmental signal that plants perceive through their photoreceptors which primarily sense critical wavelength ratios cwrs.
the diffuse fraction of solar radiation df is a key factor affecting the quality and distribution of light within the plant canopy.
we analyzed one year of sr spectral observations measured by a groundbased rotating shadowband spectroradiometer to evaluate the potential effects of df and cwrs on plants in an outdoor environment in fukuoka japan.
the daily mean df and all considered cwrs showed significant seasonal variations regardless of the solar meridian altitude.
cloudy or partly cloudy skies were prevalent throughout the year.
the ratios of ultravioleta uvauvb red rblue b and rgreen g increased during winter and decreased during summer.
conversely the ratios of photosynthetically active radiation parglobal solar radiation gsi uvgsi uvpar bg rfarred fr and uvbb increased during summer and decreased during winter.
most of the cwr correlated with df.
furthermore our study discovered a synergistic influence of air mass am water vapor pressure vp and df on specific cwrs which play a crucial role in plant light signal processing.
this highlights the potential influence of am vp and df on plant light signals thereby opening avenues for developing innovative plant growth models and ecological responses incorporating plant photoreception."
"over the past decade pathogen genome sequencing has become well established as a powerful approach to study infectious disease epidemiology.
in particular when multiple genomes are available from several geographical locations comparing them is informative about the relative size of the local pathogen populations as well as past migration rates and events between locations.
the structured coalescent model has a long history of being used as the underlying process for such phylogeographic analysis.
however the computational cost of using this model does not scale well to the large number of genomes frequently analysed in pathogen genomic epidemiology studies.
several approximations of the structured coalescent model have been proposed but their effects are difficult to predict.
here we show how the exact structured coalescent model can be used to analyse a precomputed dated phylogeny in order to perform bayesian inference on the past migration history the effective population sizes in each location and the directed migration rates from any location to another.
we describe an efficient reversible jump markov chain monte carlo scheme which is implemented in a new r package.
we use simulations to demonstrate the scalability and correctness of our method and to compare it with existing comparable software.
we also applied our new method to several stateoftheart  datasets on the population structure of real pathogens to showcase the relevance of our method to current data scales and research questions."
cerebral malaria is a severe neurovascular complication of
"motility is a hallmark of life′s dynamic processes enabling cells to actively chase prey repair wounds and shape organs.
recreating these intricate behaviors using welldefined molecules remains a major challenge at the intersection of biology physics and molecular engineering.
although the polymerization force of the actin cytoskeleton is characterized as a primary driver of cell motility recapitulating this process in protocellular systems has proven elusive.
the difficulty lies in the daunting task of distilling key components from motile cells and integrating them into model membranes in a physiologically relevant manner.
to address this we developed a method to optically control actin polymerization with high spatiotemporal precision within cellmimetic lipid vesicles known as giant unilamellar vesicles guvs.
within these active protocells the reorganization of actin networks triggered outward membrane extensions as well as the unidirectional movement of guvs at speeds of up to 0.43 μmmin comparable to typical adherent mammalian cells.
notably our findings reveal a synergistic interplay between branched and linear actin forms in promoting membrane protrusions highlighting the cooperative nature of these cytoskeletal elements.
this approach offers a powerful platform for unraveling the intricacies of cell migration designing synthetic cells with active morphodynamics and advancing bioengineering applications such as selfpropelled delivery systems and autonomous tissuelike materials."
" sterile insect technique sit incompatible insect technique iit and a combination become the alternative promising vector control approaches.
in these approaches the targeted mosquitoes need to be sterilized and released.
so far the irradiation of mosquitoes has been conducted at the pupae or adult stages.
in this study we investigated the possibility of the xray irradiation at the egg stage and also assessed the effect on the development and sterility of both wildtype and  transinfected"
"background and aims
a major goal in both basic and applied evolutionary genetics is understanding the role of drift in shaping genetic variation with fitness consequences.
for organisms amenable to controlled crosses the increased fitness of progeny from between relative to withinpopulation crosses heterosis provides a useful tool to infer historical fixation of partly recessive deleterious alleles by drift andor bottlenecks.
additionally heterosis may also provide a unique benefit in regional admixture provenancing for restorations of rare plant species but empirical data to directly test this idea is lacking.
methods
we quantified heterosis in crosses between small remnant populations of a rare prairie forb silene regia sims.
we measured early fitness components seed number per fruit germination and juvenile survival in a controlled environment.
adult fitness components survival and reproduction were quantified over two flowering seasons in two different environments a field common garden simulating the initial stages of a restoration and a greenhouse.
to our knowledge our study is the first to estimate cumulative fitness for a rare species in conditions of a newly established restoration in the field.
additionally we provide a unique comparison of heterosis estimated under controlled vs. field conditions.
key results
the consequences of betweenpopulation crosses for cumulative fitness in the field were strongly positive in two of the populations 132292 heterosis and neutral in a third.
heterosis was generally stronger when measured under field conditions and was more likely to be detected for adult fitness components.
conclusions
regional admixture provenancing in restorations should be beneficial for this species.
we advocate for more research on heterosis in rare species particularly in restorations.
such restorations can be opportunities for experimental genetics in addition to reestablishing important ecosystem services."
"deleterious germline ddx41 variants constitute the most common inherited predisposition disorder linked to myeloid neoplasms mns.
the role of ddx41 in hematopoiesis and how its germline and somatic mutations contribute to mns remain unclear.
here we show that ddx41 is essential for erythropoiesis but dispensable for the development of other hematopoietic lineages.
using stagespecific cre models for erythropoiesis we reveal that ddx41 knockout in early erythropoiesis is embryonically lethal while knockout in latestage terminal erythropoiesis allows mice to survive with normal blood counts.
ddx41 deficiency induces a significant upregulation of gquadruplexes g4 noncanonical dna structures that tend to accumulate in the early stages of erythroid precursors.
we show that ddx41 colocalizes with g4 on the erythroid genome.
ddx41 directly binds to and dissolves g4 which is significantly compromised in mnassociated ddx41 mutants.
accumulation of g4 by ddx41 deficiency induces erythroid genome instability defects in ribosomal biogenesis and upregulation of p53.
however p53 deficiency does not rescue the embryonic death of ddx41 hematopoieticspecific knockout mice.
in parallel genome instability also activates the cgassting pathway which is detrimental to survival since cgasdeficient and hematopoieticspecific ddx41 knockout mice are viable without detectable hematologic phenotypes although these mice continue to show erythroid ribosomal defects and upregulation of p53.
these findings are further supported by data from a ddx41 mutated mn patient and human ipscderived bone marrow organoids.
our study establishes ddx41 as a g4 dissolver essential for erythroid genome stability and suppressing the cgassting pathway."
"heterogeneous distribution of psi and psii in thick grana in shade chloroplasts is argued to hinder spillover of chlorophyll excitations from psii to psi.
to examine this dogma we measured fluorescence induction at 77k at 690 nm psii and 760 nm mainly psi in the leaf discs of spinacia oleracea cucumis sativus and shade tolerant alocasia odora grown at high and low light and quantified their spillover capacities.
psi fluorescence fi consists of the intrinsic psi fluorescence fiα and fluorescence caused by excitations spilt over from psii fiβ.
when fi and fii parameters between state 1 and state 2 induced by weak farred and blue light were compared psii maximum fluorescence fiim and fiβ were greater and fiα was smaller in state 1 and thereby the spillover ratio fiβfiαfiβ or fiβfim was greater in state 1. since the leftover fiim was found to be about 10 of total fm at 760 nm all the data were corrected.
even after the correction the spillover ratio in fim in state 1 ranged from 21 to 32 and the spillover ratios were comparable irrespective of growth light conditions.
although extensive grana in low light grown plants would suggest that psii and psi are too separated for spillover in a. odora chloroplasts the ratio of nonappressed thylakoid membranestotal thylakoid membranes was little affected by growth light and more than 40.  abundant nonappressed thylakoids would contribute to efficient spillover."
"mutations in genes involved in dna damage repair ddr often lead to premature aging syndromes.
while recent evidence suggests that inflammation alongside mutation accumulation and cell death may drive disease phenotypes its precise contribution to invivo pathophysiology remains unclear.
here by modeling ataxia telangiectasia at and bloom syndrome in the african turquoise killifish n. furzeri we replicate key phenotypes of ddr syndromes including infertility cytoplasmic dna fragments and reduced lifespan.
the link between ddr defects and inflammation is attributed to the activation of the cgassting pathway and interferon signaling by cytoplasmic dna.
accordingly mutating cgas partially rescues germline defects and senescence in at fish.
double mutants also display reversal of telomere abnormalities and suppression of transposable elements underscoring cgass noncanonical role as a ddr inhibitor.
our findings emphasize the role of interferon signaling in at pathology and identify the cgassting pathway as a potential therapeutic target for genomic instability syndromes."
"the human antibody repertoire is broadly reactive with carbohydrate antigens represented in the universe of all living things including both the hostself as well as the commensal microfloraderived glycomes.
here we have used bcr receptor cloning and expression together with singlecell transcriptomics to analyze the b cell repertoire to the ubiquitous nacetyldglucosamine glcnac epitope in human cohorts and dissect the immune phylogeny of this predominant class of antibodies.
we find that circulating antiglcnac b cells exhibiting canonical bmem phenotypes emerge rapidly after birth and couple this observation with evidence for germinal centerdependent affinity maturation of carbohydratespecific b cell receptors in situ during early childhood.
direct analysis of individual b cell clonotypes reveals they exhibit strikingly distinct finespecificity profiles for palettes of glcnac containing moieties.
these results suggest that a generalized exposure to complex environmental glycans drives the steady state antiglycan repertoire."
"ecosystem monitoring is a fundamental tool to avert biodiversity loss gathering valuable information that can be used to develop conservation policies evaluating management outcomes and guiding sciencebased decisionmaking.
the mar menor costal lagoon southeast of spain has experienced episodes of eutrophication due to intensive agriculture and other human activities causing mass mortalities of marine fauna.
in this scenario biodiversity monitoring is crucial to evaluate the status of fauna and flora and take appropriate measures.
here our main objective was to assess faunal composition and its spatial and temporal structure associated with the pillars used to support the built recreational wellbeing facilities along the mar menor.
we capitalised on the many sea sponges that settle on these structures by collecting tissue samples for subsequent extraction of filtered environmental dna i.e.
natural sampler dna nsdna in northern and southern areas of the lagoon both in spring and summer.
we metabarcoded all samples at the cytochrome oxidase subunit i gene coi and reliably identified 76 taxa belonging to nine different phyla with annelids poriferans molluscs and cnidarians being the richest groups.
we detected emblematic species of threatened status such as pipefishes genus syngnathus and the piddock clam pholas dactylus and others known to become invasive such as the ascidians styela canopus and botrylloides niger the barnacle amphibalanus amphitrite and the polychaetes branchiomma bairdi and branchiomma boholense.
the use of common and widely distributed sponges as natural edna samplers allowed us to characterise both spatial and temporal diversity further emphasizing the importance of this lowcost approach to monitoring biological communities in shallow coastal ecosystems."
"tumor endothelial tecs cells play a critical role in regulating immune responses within the tumor microenvironment tme.
however the mechanisms by which tecs modulate immune cell population remain unclear particularly in nonsmall cell lung cancer nsclc.
here we investigated how nsclc cells tweak normal endothelial cells necs into tecs and the subsequent effects on immune regulation.
necs were cocultured with various nsclc cell lines using 2d and 3d coculture models to evaluate tecmediated effects on immune cells.
we show that direct coculture led to significant transcriptomic proteomic and kinomic alterations in tecs especially in proinflammatory pathways.
we identified a downregulation of the costimulatory molecule ox40l in tecs compared to necs suggesting impaired tcell proliferation support.
while tecs showed a limited effect on cd8 tcell activation tecs supported cd4 tcells polarization into treg and th22 subsets.
moreover tecs also promoted m2like macrophages polarization thereby potentially contributing to the tme immunosuppression.
stateoftheart singlecell rna sequencing of 3d multicellular tumor spheroids mcts revealed distinct tec subpopulations including an inflammatory subset with upr signature.
the latter was absent in 2dcultured necs but present in freshly isolated and 2dcultured tecs from nsclc patients.
importantly we also identified within mcts a perivascular m2like macrophage subset predicted to interact with tecs with mif and midkine signaling.
in conclusion tecs in nsclc tumors play a pivotal role in remodeling the tme immune landscape by promoting immune suppression.
this study highlights the complex immunoregulatory functions of tecs within our different in vitro models that mimic aspects of the tme.
our data may provide new insights into potential therapeutic strategies targeting tecs or regulatory signaling to improve the efficacy of immunotherapy in nsclc."
"structural biology is an essential tool for understanding the molecular basis of biological processes.
although predicting protein structures by fold recognition algorithms has become increasingly powerful especially with the integration of deeplearning approaches experimentally resolved structures are indispensable for guiding structurefunction studies and for improving modelling.
however experimental structural studies of protein complexes are still challenging owing to for example the necessity for high protein concentrations and purity for downstream analyses such as cryogenic electron microscopy cryoem.
the use of"
"when emerging pathogens encounter new host species for which they are poorly adapted they must evolve to escape extinction.
pathogens experience selection on traits at multiple scales including replication rates within host individuals and transmissibility between hosts.
we analyze a stochastic model linking pathogen growth and competition within individuals to transmission between individuals.
our analysis reveals a new factor the crossscale reproductive number of a mutant virion that quantifies how quickly mutant strains increase in frequency when they initially appear in the infected host population.
this crossscale reproductive number combines with viral mutation rates singlestrain reproductive numbers and transmission bottleneck width to determine the likelihood of evolutionary emergence and whether evolution occurs swiftly or gradually within chains of transmission.
we find that wider transmission bottlenecks facilitate emergence of pathogens with shortterm infections but hinder emergence of pathogens exhibiting crossscale selective conflict and longterm infections.
our results provide a framework to advance the integration of laboratory clinical and field data in the context of evolutionary theory laying the foundation for a new generation of evidencebased risk assessment of emergence threats."
"cd8 t cells are the dominant lymphocyte population in multiple sclerosis ms lesions where they are highly clonally expanded.
the clonal identity function and antigen specificity of cd8 t cells in ms are not well understood.
here we report a comprehensive singlecell rnaseq and t cell receptor tcrseq analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid csf and blood from a cohort of treatmentnaive ms patients and control participants.
a small subset of highly expanded and activated cd8 t cells were enriched in the csf in ms that displayed high activation cytotoxicity and tissuehoming transcriptional profiles.
using a combination of unbiased and targeted antigen discovery approaches msderived cd8 t cell clonotypes recognizing epsteinbarr virus ebv antigens and multiple novel mimotopes were identified.
these findings shed vital insight into the role of cd8 t cells in ms and pave the way towards disease biomarkers and therapeutic targets."
"background and objectives preclinical studies have demonstrated direct influences of the sympathetic and vagalparasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system ans on the immune system.
the relevance of these pathways to the development of inflammatory disorders in humans remains unknown.
we hypothesized that a comprehensive examination of the ansimmune network in patients with hiv would reveal that the type and severity of autonomic neuropathy an would predict immune phenotypes with distinct clinical and demographic characteristics.
methods this is a crosssectional study of 79 adult people with a history of wellcontrolled hiv on stable combination antiretroviral treatment cart recruited from a primary care clinic network within the mount sinai health system in new york city.
all participants underwent a standardized battery of autonomic function tests summarized as the composite autonomic severity score cass and vagal and adrenergic baroreflex sensitivity brsv and brsa.
immune profiling included 1 measurement of interleukin6 il6 as part of the olink assay target 96 inflammation panel 2 nonnegative matrix factorization nmf clustering analyses on olink immune biomarkers and 3 mass cytometry cytof on a subset of participants with and without autonomic neuropathy n  10.  
results reduced activity of caudal vagal circuitry involved in the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway cap predicted higher levels of il6 spearmans rho  0.352 p0.002.
the comprehensive assessment of the ansimmune network showed four immunotypes defined by nmf analyses.
a proinflammatory immunotype defined by elevations in type 1 cytokines il6 il17 and increased numbers of cd8 tcells was associated with autonomic neuropathy an.
this association was driven by deficits in the cardiovascular sympathetic nervous system and remained strongly significant after controlling for the older age and greater burden of comorbid illness among participants with this immunotype aor4.7 p0.017.
discussion  our results provide novel support for the clinical relevance of the cap in patients with chronic inflammatory an.
these data also provide insight regarding the role of the sympathetic nervous system and aging in the progression and development of comorbidities in patients with chronic hiv and support future research aimed at developing therapies focused on modulation of the sympathetic and parasympatheticvagal nervous system."
"all cells are encapsulated in a lipid membrane that provides a responsive interface between life and its environment.
although simple membranes can be built from a single type of lipid cellular membranes contain 10s to 100s of unique lipid species.
deciphering the significance of lipidome complexity is a central challenge in understanding the design principles of living membranes.
while functions of individual lipids have been extensively studied understanding how lipidomes collectively contribute to membrane function and cell phenotypes is experimentally challenging in most organisms.
to address this challenge we turned to the simple pathogenic organism  and its genomically derived “minimal cell” jcvisyn3b to establish a living minimal membrane model system in which lipidome complexity can be experimentally manipulated.
by complexing lipids with cyclodextrins we introduce a chemically defined approach to deliver lipid ‘diets’ with different chemistries to cells resulting in cellular lipidomes with as few as seven to nearly 30 lipids species.
we explored how lipidome size and composition influences cell growth osmotic sensitivity and membrane adaptability to changes in growth temperature.
our findings indicate that lipidome composition dictates membrane adaptation to temperature change.
moreover we show that lipidome diversity enhances cellular robustness to hypoosmotic shock.
we further show that impaired acyl chain remodeling in the minimal cell is associated with impaired membrane temperature adaptation.
finally we demonstrate as a proof of principle how cells with tuneable lipidomes can be used as experimental chassis for screening membrane active antimicrobial peptides.
our study introduces an experimental resource and foundation for deciphering the role of lipidome complexity in membrane function and cellular fitness."
"diatoms vital to global carbon fixation and climate change mitigation produce 20 of the world’s fixed organic carbon annually.
their potential as cell factories for biofuels proteins and other high value chemicals remains underutilized due to a lack of genetic engineering tools with dna delivery being the biggest challenge.
here we present an optimized highly efficient electroporation method for delivering dna constructs as large as 55.6 kb to"
"in order to maintain genomic integrity dna replication must be highly coordinated.
disruptions in this process can cause replication stress which is aberrant in many pathologies including cancer.
despite this little is known about the mechanisms governing the temporal regulation of dna replication initiation thought to be related to the limited copy number of firing factors.
here we present a high 1kilobase resolution stochastic model of saccharomyces cerevisiae wholegenome replication in which origins compete to associate with limited firing factors.
after developing an algorithm to fit this model to replication timing data we validated the model by reproducing experimental interorigin distances origin efficiencies and replication fork directionality.
this suggests the model accurately simulates the aspects of dna replication most important for determining its dynamics.
we also use the model to predict measures of dna replication dynamics which are yet to be determined experimentally and investigate the potential impacts of variations in firing factor concentrations on dna replication."
"functional defects resulting from deleterious mutations can often be restored during evolution by compensatory mutations elsewhere in the genome.
importantly this process can generate the genetic diversity seen in networks regulating the same biological function in different species.
how the options for compensatory evolution depend on the molecular interactions underlying these functions is currently unclear.
in this study we investigate how gene deletions compensating for a defect in the polarity pathway of saccharomyces cerevisiae impact the fitness landscape.
using a transposon mutagenesis screen we demonstrate that gene fitness has changed on a genomewide scale in the compensated strain.
an analysis of the functional associations between the affected genes reveals that compensation impacts cellular processes that have no clear connection to cell polarity.
moreover genes belonging to the same process tend to show the same direction of gene fitness change indicating that compensation rewires the fitness contribution of cellular processes rather than of individual genes.
in conclusion our results strongly suggest that functional overlap between modules and the interconnectedness of the molecular interaction network play major roles in mediating compensatory evolution."
"longterm stable and realtime decoding of behaviordependent neural dynamics from the same cells is critical for braincomputer interfaces bcis and for understanding neural evolution during learning and memory and disease progression.
recent advances in flexible and highdensity electrodes have enabled the stability required for longterm tracking but generate vast datasets that challenge existing analysis methods.
current spike sorting approaches rely heavily on manual curation and lack scalability for largescale realtime processing.
here we introduce autosort an endtoend multimodal deep neural networkbased method that enables realtime tracking and decoding of the same neurons over months.
autosort uses a scalable strategy by learning deep representations from initial recordings and applying the trained model in realtime.
it integrates multimodal features including waveform features distribution patterns and inferred neuron spatial locations to ensure robustness and accuracy.
autosort outperforms existing methods in both simulated and longterm recordings reducing computational demands by using only 10 of the time and 25 of the memory compared to conventional methods.
by combining autosort with highdensity flexible probes we track neural dynamics in realtime during motor learning and skill acquisition over 2 months capturing intrinsic neural manifold drift stabilization and postlearning representational drift.
autosort offers a promising solution for studying longterm neural intrinsic dynamics and enabling realtime bci decoding."
 none of the authors have any financial interest or conflict of interest related to this research.
"gene regulatory networks grns play a crucial role in the control of cellular functions.
numerous methods have been developed to infer grns from gene expression data including mechanismbased approaches informationbased approaches and more recent deep learning techniques the last of which often overlooks the underlying gene expression mechanisms.
in this work we introduce trendy a novel grn inference method that integrates transformer models to enhance the mechanismbased wendy approach.
through testing on both simulated and experimental datasets trendy demonstrates superior performance compared to existing methods.
furthermore we apply this transformerbased approach to three additional inference methods showcasing its broad potential to enhance grn inference."
"altered patterns of visual social attention preference detected using eyetracking and a variety of different paradigms are increasingly proposed as sensitive biomarkers for autism spectrum disorder.
however few eye tracking studies have compared the relative efficacy of different paradigms to discriminate between autistic compared with typically developing children and their sensitivity to specific symptoms.
to target this issue the current study used three common eye tracking protocols contrasting social versus nonsocial stimuli in young 27 years old chinese autistic n  35 and typically developing n  34 children matched for age and gender.
protocols included dancing people"
 the authors declare that there are no known conflicts of interest
"pepitem is an immunemodulatory peptide that effectively regulates inflammation and mitigates immunemediated inflammatory diseases imids.
here we identify two independently active tripeptide pharmacophores within pepitem and engineered peptidomimetics with enhanced pharmacodynamic properties.
these peptidomimetics regulate tcell trafficking in vitro and reduce tcell neutrophil and macrophage numbers in the inflamed peritoneal cavity in vivo.
in a plaque psoriasis model topical administration reduced disease severity inflammation and immune cell infiltration while regulating cytokine release in macrophages and fibroblasts as well as keratinocyte proliferation.
th1 and th17 cell abundance along with their cytokines was reduced in secondary lymphoid organs.
this expanded functional repertoire of pepitem and its derivatives provides innovative tools for countering immune and stromal cellinduced pathology in imids paving the way for a novel class of antiinflammatory agents."
" adoption of a plantbased diet is a popular lifestyle choice for many owners of canine companion animals.
increasingly owners would like to feed their canine companions a similar diet.
a plantbased dietary pattern has been reported to be associated with some micronutrient deficiencies.
complete dog foods are by definition supposed to be nutritionally replete in all macro and micronutrients.
few studies have reported a full nutritional analysis of complete dry plantversus meatbased dog foods."
"bomb 14c ages in trees indicate the time elapsed between carbon fixation into nonstructural carbon nsc and its use for metabolism and growth.
it remains unknown why newly grown aboveground tissues have a narrow range of young 14cages while fine root ages can span decades.
we measured 14c in tissues of two coniferous species along an alpine treeline ecotone and used a mixing model to estimate the fraction of nsc that is metabolically active.
we expected that greater growth limitation higher in the ecotone would supply more freshly fixed nsc to respiration active nsc carbohydrates and roots resulting in younger 14cages of nsc used to grow tissues.
results confirmed an increase in fresh nsc supply with elevation.
needle and branch growth was supported by young nsc  2 yr with little elevation influence while root growth was supported by older nsc that declined from 10 to 6 yr with elevation.
massive allocation of fresh nsc to needles and branches could explain their young 14cages.
variable fine root 14cages reflect tree c status with older ages when aboveground growth limits the contribution of new c belowground while young ages represent greater delivery of fresh nsc to roots."
"glucose sensing and monitoring are crucial for biological and medical applications.
compared to existing methods realtime detection and longterm monitoring are still required.
singlewalled carbon nanotubes swcnts have excellent optical properties for sensing applications which provide the possibility for designing a new generation of glucose sensors.
in this study we describe a method for covalently conjugate glucose oxidase gox on swcnts as an optical glucose sensor.
the functional groups are introduced by a photocatalytic reaction which acts as the handle for protein loading on swcnts.
in this sp3 defect reaction the optical properties of swcnts can be maintained.
with a convenient bioconjugation reaction the gox could be covalently linked with swcnts.
compared to the noncovalent immobilization conjugates the covalent conjugate sensor exhibits a much stronger optical response toward glucose and the stability of the biosensor also increases in harsh conditions.
at the same time we also report the changing ratio of the original e and defected e"
initially developed as a derivatized analog of 5fluorouracil for the treatment of colorectal cancer carmofur has more recently demonstrated potent covalent inhibition of the main protease m
"influenza neuraminidase is a crucial target for protective antibodies but development of recombinant neuraminidase protein as a vaccine has been held back by instability and variable expression.
we have taken a pragmatic approach to improving expression and stability of neuraminidase by grafting antigenic surface loops from lowexpressing neuraminidase proteins onto highexpressing strains.
we generated hybrid proteins bearing the antigenic properties of the loop donor accompanied by the favourable expression stability and tetrameric structure of the loop recipient.
the hybrid neuraminidase proteins were recognised by a broad set of human monoclonal antibodies induced by influenza infection or vaccination and grafted loops were superposable in their xray structures.
immunisation of mice with neuraminidase hybrids induced inhibitory antibodies to the loop donor and protected against lethal influenza challenge.
this pragmatic technique enables improved expression of influenza neuraminidase proteins for vaccine manufacture."
"long unique genomic regions have been reported to be highly enriched for developmental genes in mice and humans.
in this paper we identify unique genomic regions using a highly efficient method based on fast string matching.
we quantify the resource consumption and accuracy of this method before applying it to the genomes of 18 mammals.
we annotate their unique regions of at least 10 kb and find that they are strongly enriched for developmental genes across the board.
when investigating the subset of unique regions that lack annotations we found in the tasmanian devil the gene encoding iniositol polyphosphate5phosphatase a which is an essential part of intracellular signaling.
this implies that unique regions might be given priority when annotating mammalian genomes.
our documented pipeline for annotating unique regions in any mammalian genome is available from the repository"
"frailty indexes fis capture health status in humans and model organisms.
to accelerate our understanding of biological aging and carry out scalable interventional studies highthroughput approaches are necessary.
we previously introduced a machine visionbased visual frailty index vfi that uses mouse behavior in the open field to assess frailty using c57bl6j b6j data.
aging trajectories are highly genetic and are frequently modeled in genetically diverse animals.
in order to extend the vfi to genetically diverse mouse populations we collect frailty and behavior data on a large cohort of aged diversity outbred do mice.
combined with previous data this represents one of the largest videobased aging behavior datasets to date.
using these data we build accurate predictive models of frailty chronological age and even the proportion of life lived.
the extension of automated and objective frailty assessment tools to genetically diverse mice will enable better modeling of aging mechanisms and enable highthroughput interventional aging studies."
"micrornas mirnas regulate gene expression by binding to mrnas inhibiting translation or promoting mrna degradation.
mirnas are of great importance in the development of various diseases.
currently a variety of mirna target prediction tools are available that analyze sequence complementarity thermodynamic stability and evolutionary conservation to predict mirnatarget interactions mtis within the 3 untranslated region 3utr.
we propose a concept for further screening of human sequencebased predicted mtis by considering the disease similarity between mirnas and genes to establish a prediction database of diseasespecific mtis.
we finetuned the sentencebert model to calculate the semantic similarity of disease.
the method achieved an f1 score of 0.88 in accurately distinguishing human proteinlevel experimentally western blot reporter assay etc.
validated mtis and predicted mtis.
moreover this method exhibits exceptional generalizability across different databases.
the proposed method was utilized to calculate the similarity of disease in 1220904 human mtis from mirtarbase mirdb and mirwalk involving 6085 genes and 1261 premirnas.
the study holds the potential to offer valuable insights into comprehending mirnagene regulatory networks and advancing progress in disease diagnosis treatment and drug development."
"proper staining of cell plasma membrane is indispensable for fluorescence imaging.
herein we present an array of five anionic cyaninebased turnon plasma membrane probes with emission spanning from green to near infrared.
they are analogous of commonly used membright probes family where two zwitterionic anchor groups are replaced with anionic sulfonates with dodecyl chains.
the developed probes provide selective washfree staining of plasma membranes of live cells in vitro featuring improved brightness and slower internalization inside the cells.
in comparison to proteinbased wheat germ agglutinin membrane markers new membrane probes provide better staining in poorly assessable cellcell contacts.
a key challenge is to stain cell plasma membranes directly in vivo.
during in vivo brain tissue imaging in living mice by twophoton microscopy the anionic cyanine probes allowed us to visualize in detail the pyramidal neurons with high image quality clearly resolving neuron soma dendrites with dendritic spines and axons with axonal boutons.
the developed anionic cyaninebased plasma membrane probes constitute an important extension of the toolbox of fluorescent probes for plasma membrane research."
"rbfox1 regulates transcriptional networks linked to synaptic transmission and neurodevelopment.
mutations in the  gene are associated with psychiatric disorders but how rbfox1 influences psychiatric disorder vulnerability remains unclear.
recent studies showed that rbfox1 mediates the alternative splicing of  a critical hpa axis activator.
further rbfox1 dysfunction is linked to dysregulation of bdnftrkb a pathway promoting neuroplasticity neuronal survival and stress resilience.
hence rbfox1 dysfunction may increase psychiatric disorder vulnerability via hpa axis dysregulation leading to disrupted development and allostatic overload.
to test this hypothesis we generated a zebrafish  loss of function lof line and examined behavioural and molecular effects during development.
in larvae and adults  lof resulted in hyperactivity impulsivity and hyperarousal and alterations in proliferation fertility and survival traits associated with allostatic overload.
in larvae  lof disrupted expression of  and hpi axis genes.
these latter were restored after chronic trkb agonistantagonist treatment.
in adults  and hpi axes dysregulation was only seen following acute stress.
our findings revealed a strict interplay between rbfox1 and bdnftrkb in stress resilience and suggest that"
"despite advances in peptide and protein design the rational design of membranespanning peptides that form conducting channels remains challenging due to our imperfect understanding of the sequencetostructure relationships that drive membrane insertion assembly and conductance.
here we describe the design and computational and experimental characterization of a series of coiled coilbased peptides that form transmembrane αhelical barrels."
"analysis of viral genetic data has previously revealed distinct withinhost population structures in both untreated and interferontreated chronic hepatitis c virus hcv infections.
while multiple subpopulations persisted during the infection each subpopulation was observed only intermittently.
however it was unknown whether similar patterns were also present after direct acting antiviral daa treatment where viral populations were often assumed to go through narrow bottlenecks.
here we tested for the maintenance of population structure after daa treatment failure.
we analysed wholegenome nextgeneration sequencing data generated from a randomised study using daas the boson study.
we focused on samples collected from patients n84 who did not achieve sustained virological response i.e.
treatment failure and had sequenced virus from multiple timepoints.
for each individual we tracked concordance in nucleotide variant frequencies through time.
using a sliding window approach we applied sequencedbased and treebased clustering algorithms across the entire hcv genome.
finally we reconstructed viral haplotypes and estimated lineage specific withinhost divergence rates from the haplotype phylogenies.
distinct viral subpopulations were maintained among a high proportion of individuals post daa treatment failure.
using maximum likelihood modelling and model comparison we found an overdispersion of viral evolutionary rates among individuals and significant differences in evolutionary rates between lineages within individuals.
these results suggest the virus is compartmentalised within individuals with the varying evolutionary rates due to different viral replication rates or different selection pressures.
we propose lineage awareness in future analyses of hcv evolution and infections to avoid conflating patterns from distinct lineages and to recognise the likely existence of unsampled subpopulations."
"mutations fuel evolution while also causing diseases like cancer.
epigenometargeted dna repair can help organisms protect important genomic regions from mutation.
however the adaptive value mechanistic diversity and evolution of epigenometargeted dna repair systems across the tree of life remain unresolved.
here we investigated the evolution of histone reader domains fused to the dna repair protein msh6 muts homolog 6 across over 4000 eukaryotes.
we uncovered a paradigmatic example of convergent evolution msh6 has independently acquired distinct histone reader domains each targeting histone modifications in active genes.
conservation in msh6 histone reader domains shows signatures of natural selection particularly for amino acids that bind specific histone modifications.
species that have gained or retained msh6 histone readers tend to have larger genome sizes especially marked by a significantly greater contribution of introns to genic regions.
these patterns support theoretical predictions about the conditions under which coding sequence hypomutation is likely beneficial.
the evolution of epigenometargeted dna repair has implications for genome evolution health and the mutational origins of genomic diversity across the tree of life."
" sp nov a new species of subterranean eel loach is described from kerala india.
it is distinguished from its subterranean congeners by the presence of a dorsal fin four pectoral rays and five segmented anal fin rays.
genetic analyses suggest that  is closely related to  but is distinct in morphology particularly by the presence of a dorsal fin.
the low genetic distance and significant morphological difference between these two  species suggest that they have diverged from an immediate common ancestor and evolved distinct adaptations to subterranean niches.
exhibits less evolved troglobitic traits compared to  and"
"dopamine is an essential modulator of oxygen sensing and control of ventilation and was the first neurotransmitter described in the carotid body.
little is known of the evolutionary significance of dopamine in oxygen sensing or whether it plays a similar role in anamniotes.
in the model vertebrate zebrafish  presynaptic dopamine d receptor expression was demonstrated in gill neuroepithelial cells necs—analogues of mammalian oxygen chemoreceptors however a mechanism for dopamine and d in oxygen sensing in the gills had not been defined.
the present study tested the hypothesis that presynaptic d receptors provide a feedback mechanism that attenuates the chemoreceptor response to hypoxia.
using an isolated gill preparation from tggcamp6s zebrafish we measured hypoxiainduced changes in intracellular ca concentration ca in necs and postsynaptic neurons.
activation of d with dopamine or specific d agonist quinpirole decreased hypoxic responses in necs whereas d antagonist domperidone had the opposite effect.
addition of sq22536 an adenylyl cyclase ac inhibitor decreased the effect of hypoxia on ca similar to dopamine.
activation of ac by forskolin partially recovered the suppressive effect of dopamine on the ca response to hypoxia.
further we demonstrate that the response to hypoxia in postsynaptic sensory neurons was dependent upon innervation with necs and was subject to modulation by activation of presynaptic d. our results provide the first evidence of neurotransmission of the hypoxic signal at the necnerve synapse in the gill and suggest that a presynaptic modulatory role for dopamine in oxygen sensing arose early in vertebrate evolution."
"the purinergic receptor p2y p2yr is a wellrecognized target for antithrombotic agents.
this receptor is also expressed in microglia where it plays a key role in neuroinflammation and microglia activation.
to investigate p2yrmediated actions in the central nervous system cns the development of novel brainpenetrant ligands is essential along with further  studies.
a radiolabeled easily accessible tool compound would significantly advance such drug discovery efforts.
herein we describe the hlabeling of a nonnucleotide p2yr antagonist az12464237 and its  binding properties to the receptor in membrane preparations form transfected cells as well as on mouse brain tissues.
the radioligand shows high affinity toward both the human and rat p2yr in transfected cells with  values of 3.12 ± 0.70 nm human and 16.6 ± 3.4 nm rat as determined by saturation binding studies.
the binding kinetics of haz12464237 are rapid with a short target residence time ∼1 min.
we further confirmed the selectivity of the radioligand by performing competitive displacement studies in which reported p2yr ligands and other p2y receptors ligands were tested for binding against haz12464237.
additionally the radioligand proved useful for  autoradiography studies on mouse brain tissues although a small amount of offtarget binding was observed in p2yr knockout mice.
this could be traced to glycogen synthase kinase 3 α. considering the growing interest in p2yr as a biomarker for microglia activation haz12464237 represents a promising tool for  studies including screening assays aimed at identifying novel p2yr ligands for cns applications."
"antimicrobial resistance amr is a major threat to global health and resistant bacterial populations have been observed to develop and spread in and around wastewater.
however in vitro studies on amr development are typically conducted in ideal media conditions which can differ in composition and nutrient density from wastewater.
in this study we compare the growth and amr development of e. coli in standard lb broth to a synthetic wastewater recipe and autoclaved wastewater samples from the massachusetts water resources authority mwra.
we found that synthetic wastewater and real wastewater samples both supported less bacterial growth compared to lb.
additionally bacteria grown in synthetic wastewater and real wastewater samples had differing susceptibility to antibiotic pressure from doxycycline ciprofloxacin and streptomycin.
however amr development over time during continuous passaging under subinhibitory antibiotic pressure was similar in fold change across all media types.
thus we find that while lb can act as a proxy for wastewater for amr studies in e. coli synthetic wastewater is a more accurate predictor of both e.coli growth and antibiotic resistance development.
moreover we also show that antibiotic resistance can develop in real wastewater samples and components within wastewater likely have synergistic and antagonistic interactions with antibiotics."
"background and aims
metabolic dysfunctionassociated steatotic liver disease masld is now the most common liver disease worldwide.
this study investigates how targeting two key nuclear receptors involved in hepatic energy metabolism peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor alpha pparalpha and estrogenrelated receptor alpha erralpha impacts masld.
methods
the pparalpha agonist pemafibrate andor erralpha inverse agonist c29 were administered in a short and longterm western diet plus fructose model and a diabeticbackground streptozotocinwestern diet model stzwd.
liver morphology histological samples serum metabolites rna and protein levels were analysed and scanning electron microscopy was performed.
in addition we performed cellbased assays and immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence stainings with light and superresolution confocal microscopy of healthy masld and mash human livers.
results
the ligand combination efficacy was underscored by reduced liver steatosis in all the mouse models.
both longterm models showed improvements in body weight and liver morphology alongside reductions in inflammation and fibrosis.
additionally tumor formation was prevented in the stzwd mice model.
cellbased assays demonstrated that erralpha inhibits pparalpha activity likely explaining why erralpha blockage improves inflammatory and lipid metabolism gene profiles and enhances lipidlowering effects.
complementary rna sequencing and shotgun proteomics combined with enrichment analysis jointly identified downregulated serum amyloid a1a2 as an essential component underlying the combination treatments effectiveness.
masldmash patient livers showed reduced pparalpha and increased erralpha levels supporting disrupted nr crosstalk in the hepatocyte nucleus.
conclusion
our study comprehensively supports that dual nuclear receptor targeting by simultaneously increasing pparalpha and diminishing erralpha activity may represent a viable novel strategy against masld."
"despite the growing interest in mirrorimage loligonucleotides both as a robust nucleic acid analogue and as an artificial genetic polymer their broader adoption in research and medicine remains hindered by challenges associated with the synthesis of long sequences especially for lrna.
herein we present a novel strategy for assembling long lrnas via the joining of two or more shorter fragments using crosschiral ligase ribozymes together with new substrate activation chemistry.
we show that 5′monophosphorylated lrna which is readily prepared by solid phase synthesis can be activated by chemical attachment of a 5′adenosine monophosphate amp or diphosphate adp yielding 5′adenosyl dior tri phosphate lrna.
the activation reaction is performed in mild aqueous conditions proceeds efficiently with short or large lrna and yielding few biproducts requires little or no further purification after activation.
importantly both groups when added to lrna are compatible with ribozymemediated ligation with the 5′adenosyl triphosphate permitting rapid and efficient joining of multiple long lrna strands.
this is exemplified by the assembly of a 129nt lrna molecule via a single crosschiral ligation event.
overall by relying on ribozymes that can be readily prepared by"
"motivated by the recent putative reproducibility crisis we discuss the relationship between replicability of scientific studies reproducibility of results obtained in these replications and the philosophy of statistics.
our approach focuses on challenges in specifying scientific studies for scientific inference via statistical inference and is complementary to classical discussions in philosophy of statistics.
we particularly consider the challenges in replicating studies exactly using the notion of the idealized experiment.
we argue against treating reproducibility as an inherently desirable property of scientific results and in favor of viewing it as a tool to measure distance between an original study and its replications.
to sensibly study the implications of replicability and results reproducibility on inference such a measure of replication distance is needed.
we present an effort to delineate such a framework here addressing some challenges in capturing the components of scientific studies while identifying others as ongoing issues.
we illustrate our measure of replication distance by simulations using a toy example.
rather than replications we present purposefully planned modifications as an appropriate tool to inform scientific inquiry.
our ability to measure replication distance serves scientists in their search for replicationready studies.
we believe that likelihoodbased and evidential approaches may play a critical role towards building a statistics that effectively serves the practical needs of science."
"mitophagy is crucial for maintaining mitochondrial health but how its levels adjust to different stress conditions remains unclear.
in this study we investigated the role of the dele1hri axis of integrated stress response isr in regulating mitophagy a key mitochondrial stress pathway.
our findings show that the isr suppresses mitophagy under nondepolarizing mitochondrial stress by positively regulating mitochondrial protein import independent of atf4 activation.
mitochondrial protein import is regulated by the rate of protein synthesis under both depolarizing and nondepolarizing stress.
without isr increased protein synthesis overwhelms the mitochondrial import machinery reducing its efficiency.
under depolarizing stress mitochondrial import is heavily impaired even with active isr leading to significant pink1 accumulation.
in contrast nondepolarizing stress allows more efficient protein import in the presence of isr resulting in lower mitophagy.
without isr mitochondrial protein import becomes severely compromised causing pink1 accumulation to reach the threshold necessary to trigger mitophagy.
these findings reveal a novel link between isrregulated protein synthesis mitochondrial import and mitophagy offering potential therapeutic targets for diseases associated with mitochondrial dysfunction."
" is a parasitic mite species that negatively affects the health of the  colonies.
recent reports show that it is spreading westwards through central asia into europe.
several field and laboratory methods have been proposed to detect  spp.
in  colonies however most of them are either laborious costly or ineffective.
here we introduce a novel method for detecting  based on the mite’s characteristic biology reduced feeding as bee pupae mature brief dispersal phase on adult bees and agility and the use of wax strips.
sealed worker brood cells at the development stage of white to purpleeyed pupae are swiftly decapped with wax strips to observe and count surfacing adult mites.
our study shows over 90  detection efficacy and brood survival and ease of application.
therefore we recommend the novel “rapid brood decapping” method as a reliable tool for detecting and monitoring  infestation."
the global application of
"north american beavers  are semiaquatic rodents recognized as keystone species that increase the diversity of freshwater ecosystems.
this study aimed to characterize the mortality and pathological findings of freeranging beavers in california and based on these results establish the potential threats to freshwater ecosystems.
this study included eighteen beavers submitted for postmortem examination between 2008 and 2024 at the california animal health and food safety laboratory uc davis.
gross and microscopic examination bacteriological parasitological immunohistochemical and molecular techniques were used as tools to diagnose the cause of deathreason for euthanasia and comorbidities in the beavers.
encephalitis caused by the larva migrans of  spp.
was the most prevalent 918 cause of mortalityreason for euthanasia followed by bacterial infections in 6 individuals.
in these 6 animals bacterial bronchopneumonia was diagnosed in two  and a mix of gramnegative and positive bacterial infection and  encephalitis bacterial myofascitis  and  bacterial encephalitis  and tularemia"
"the taiwan precision medicine initiative tpmi a project initiated by the academia sinica in collaboration with 16 major medical centers around taiwan has recruited 565390 participants who consented to provide dna samples for genetic profiling and grant access to their electronic medical records emr for studies to develop precision medicine.
access to the emr is both retrospective and prospective allowing researchers to conduct prospective studies over time.
genetic profiling is done with populationoptimized snp arrays for the han chinese populations that enable genetic analyses such as genomewide association phenomewide association and polygenic risk score studies to evaluate common disease risk and pharmacogenetic response.
furthermore the tpmi participants agree to be contacted for future research opportunities related to their genetic risks and receive personalized genetic risk profiles with health management recommendations.
tpmi has established the tpmi data access platform tdap a central database and analysis platform that both safeguards the security of the data and facilitates academic research.
the tpmi is the largest noneuropean cohort that merges genetic profiles with emr in the world.
with a cohort that can be followed over time it can be utilized to validate genetic risk prediction models conduct clinical trials to show the efficacy of riskbased health management and optimize health policies based on genetic risks.
in this report we describe the tpmi study design the population and genetic characteristics of the tpmi cohort and the power it provides to conduct crucial studies in developing precision medicine on a population and personal level.
as han chinese represent almost 20 of the worlds population the results of tpmi studies will benefit 1.4 billion people around the world and serve as a model for developing populationbased precision medicine."
"cellular adaptations to change often involve posttranslational modifications of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins.
an example found in protists and plants is the modification of serine and threonine residues of dozens to hundreds of nucleocytoplasmic proteins with a single fucose ofuc.
a nucleocytoplasmic ofucosyltransferase oft occurs in the pathogen toxoplasma gondii the social amoeba dictyostelium and higher plants where it is called spy because mutants have a spindly appearance.
ofucosylation which is required for optimal proliferation of toxoplasma and dictyostelium is paralogous to the oglcnacylation of nucleocytoplasmic proteins of plants and animals that is involved in stress and nutritional responses.
ofuc was first discovered in toxoplasma using aleuria aurantia lectin but its broad specificity for terminal fucose residues on n and olinked glycans in the secretory pathway limits its use.
here we present affinity purified rabbit antisera that are selective for the detection and enrichment of proteins bearing fucoseoser or fucoseothr.
these antibodies detect numerous nucleocytoplasmic proteins in toxoplasma dictyostelium and arabidopsis as well as ofuc occurring on secretory proteins of mammalian and dictyostelium cells although the latter are sometimes capped by further glycosylation.
the antibodies label toxoplasma acanthamoeba and dictyostelium  in a pattern reminiscent of oglcnac in animal cells including nuclear pores.
the ofucome of dictyostelium is partially conserved with that of toxoplasma and is highly induced during starvationinduced development.
these antisera demonstrate the unique antigenicity of ofuc document conservation of the ofucome among unrelated protists and will enable the study of the ofucomes of other organisms possessing oftlike genes."
"in vitro construction of selfreproducible artificial systems is a major challenge in bottomup synthetic biology.
here we developed a reconstituted system capable of sustainably regenerating all 20 aminoacyltrna synthetases aarss which are major components of the translation system.
to achieve this we needed five types of improvements 1 optimization of aars sequences for efficient translation 2 optimization of the composition of the translation system to enhance translation 3 employment of another bacterial alars and serrs to improve each aminoacylation activity 4 diminishing the translational inhibition caused by certain aars sequences by codon optimization and efp addition and 5 balancing the dna concentrations of 20 aarss to match each requirement.
after these improvements we succeeded in the sustainable regeneration of all 20 aarss for up to 20 cycles of 2.5fold serial dilutions.
these methodologies and results provide a substantial advancement toward the realization of selfreproducible artificial systems."
"the plasticity of plant cells underlies their wide capacity to regenerate with increasing evidence in plants and animals implicating cell cycle dynamics in cellular reprogramming.
to investigate the cell cycle during cellular reprogramming we developed a comprehensive set of cell cycle phase markers in the arabidopsis root.
using singlecell rnaseq profiles and live imaging during regeneration we found that a subset of cells near an ablation injury dramatically increases division rate by truncating g1.
cells in g1 undergo a transient nuclear peak of glutathione gsh prior to coordinated entry into s phase followed by rapid divisions and cellular reprogramming.
a symplastic block of the ground tissue impairs regeneration which is rescued by exogenous gsh.
we propose a model in which gsh from the outer tissues is released upon injury licensing an exit from g1 near the wound to induce rapid cell division and reprogramming."
"a major challenge for undergraduate students engaged in research is reading scientific literature.
this is especially true for students engaged in biophysics research where many of the concepts definitions and experimental methodologies discussed may be beyond the material covered in standard undergraduate courses.
without specific guidance on how to read journal articles students can become overwhelmed which may lead to students reading fewer papers and not engaging with the scientific literature related to their research.
to help undergraduate students effectively engage with scientific papers we have developed a guided reading protocol that combines prereading strategies structured notetaking and the use of chatgpt.
using chatgpt in this protocol allows students to clarify unfamiliar terms and concepts in an interactive way that helps them to integrate the paper’s content into their own understanding.
to test the impact of this protocol participants in this study were given an initial survey to determine their comfort and experience with reading scientific literature.
after this they were given an abridged biophysics paper and the chatgpt assisted guided reading protocol.
the chatgpt transcripts were analyzed using open coding and the students were given a poststudy survey to determine how they felt about their experience using chatgpt.
we found that most students do not appear to engage with the literature regularly which may be due to barriers they encounter in terms of new and unknown content.
analyzing their conversations with the chatbot we observed that students asked for definitions explanations of unknown concepts summaries of text or their own understanding and simplifications of the text.
overall students reported in the postimplementation survey that using chatgpt was a positive experience and all students reported that they expected to use chatgpt in the future when reading scientific literature.
from this work we believe that this new chatbot assisted reading protocol may be a way to keep novice biophysics students from becoming discouraged when they begin reading scientific literature and help keep them engaged with the current literature in the field."
"tissue engineering strategies predominantly rely on the production of living substitutes whereby implanted cells actively participate in the regenerative process.
beyond cost and delayed graft availability the patientspecific performance of engineered tissues poses serious concerns on their clinical translation ability.
a more exciting paradigm consists in exploiting celllaid engineered extracellular matrices eecm which can be used as offtheshelf materials.
here the regenerative capacity solely relies on the preservation of the eecm structure and embedded signals to instruct an endogenous repair.
we recently described the possibility to exploit custom human stem cell lines for eecm manufacturing.
in addition to the conferred standardization the availability of such cell lines opened avenues for the design of tailored eecms by applying dedicated genetic tools.
in this study we demonstrated the exploitation of crisprcas9 as a high precision system for editing the composition and function of eecms.
human mesenchymal stromalstem cell hmsc lines were modified to knockout vegf and runx2 and assessed for their capacity to generate osteoinductive cartilage matrices.
we report the successful editing of hmscs subsequently leading to targeted vegf and runx2knockout cartilage eecms.
despite the absence of vegf eecms retained full capacity to instruct ectopic endochondral ossification.
conversely runx2edited eecms exhibited impaired hypertrophy reduced ectopic ossification and superior cartilage repair in a rat osteochondral defect.
in summary our approach can be harnessed to identify the necessary eecm factors driving endogenous repair.
our work paves the road towards the compositional eecms editing and their exploitation in broad regenerative contexts."
"the use of organoids especially patientderived organoids for highthroughput screening hts is widely accepted due to their ability to mimic the threedimensional 3d structure function and drug responses of in vivo tissues.
however the complexity of handling extracellular matrix ecm components with traditional hts devices leads to the utilization of suspension cultures in matrixfree or matrixlow conditions during hts which can alter their transcriptomic landscape and drug responses.
here we develop a wholeprocess 3d ecmencapsulated organoidbased automated hts wp3doahts platform which enables the rapid and accurate generation of uniformly distributed 3d cellmatrix mixture domes at the center of each well in 96well plates.
this approach replicates the process of manual organoid culture but with superior stability and reproducibility.
utilizing this platform we screened 2802 compounds on neuroendocrine cervical cancer organoids a rare malignancy with significant unmet clinical needs.
we identified 7 top hits that display strong antitumor effects with remarkably low halfmaximal inhibitory concentration ic"
"humans and other groupliving animals tend to distribute their social effort disproportionately.
individuals predominantly interact with a small number of close companions while maintaining weaker social bonds with less familiar group members.
by incorporating this behaviour into a mathematical model we find that a single parameter which we refer to as social fluidity controls the rate of social mixing within the group.
we compare the social fluidity of 13 species by applying the model to empirical human and animal social interaction data.
to investigate how social behavior influences the likelihood of an epidemic outbreak we derive an analytical expression of the relationship between social fluidity and the basic reproductive number of an infectious disease.
for highly fluid social behaviour disease transmission is revealed to be densitydependent.
for species that form more stable social bonds the model describes frequencydependent transmission that is sensitive to changes in social fluidity."
"pterygium is an ocular disease in which the conjunctival tissue invades the cornea.
when the pterygium tissue reaches the pupillary region the visual function of the patient is affected.
currently surgical removal is the only effective treatment.
however the recurrence rate of pterygium after surgery can be high.
pterygium is also a health disparity issue since it is more prevalent in the hispanic and latino american population.
in this study we determined if the rho kinase inhibitor can be used to prevent pterygium recurrence since its antifibrosis effects have been reported in other cell and tissue types.
we cultured primary pterygium cells from pterygium tissues from hispanic and latino american african american caucasian and asian donors and used those cells for viability assays scratch assays migration assays and immunostaining of factin fibronectin collagen i and α smooth muscle actin.
we found that the rho kinase inhibitor y27632 decreased cell viability wound healing cell migration as well as the expression of extracellular matrix and myofibroblast markers in cultured pterygium cells.
we believe that rho kinases inhibitors are a potential postsurgical treatment to prevent pterygium recurrence."
"the repeated evolution of the same trait in different lineages provides powerful natural experiments to study the phenotypic and genotypic predictability of how traits are gained and lost.
a fascinating example of this is the repeated evolution of hummingbird pollination in plant lineages in the americas a widespread and often unidirectional phenomenon.
the spiral gingers in the genus"
"stroke is a leading cause of death and disability worldwide.
atrial myopathy including fibrosis is associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke but the mechanisms underlying this association are poorly understood.
fibrosis modifies myocardial structure impairing electrical propagation and tissue biomechanics and creating stagnant flow regions where clots could form.
fibrosis can be mapped noninvasively using late gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging lgemri.
however fibrosis maps are not currently incorporated into stroke risk calculations or computational electromechanofluidic models.
we present multiphysics simulations of left atrial la myocardial motion and hemodynamics using patientspecific anatomies and fibrotic maps from lgemri.
we modify tissue stiffness and active tension generation in fibrotic regions and investigate how these changes affect la flow for different fibrotic burdens.
we find that fibrotic regions and to a lesser extent nonfibrotic regions experience reduced myocardial strain resulting in decreased la emptying fraction consistent with clinical observations.
both fibrotic tissue stiffening and hypocontractility independently reduce la function but together these two alterations cause more pronounced effects than either one alone.
fibrosis significantly alters flow patterns throughout the atrial chamber and particularly the filling and emptying jets of the left atrial appendage laa.
the effects of fibrosis in la flow are largely captured by the concomitant changes in la emptying fraction except inside the laa where a multifactorial behavior is observed.
this work illustrates how highfidelity multiphysics models can be used to study thrombogenesis mechanisms in patientspecific anatomies shedding light onto the links between atrial fibrosis and ischemic stroke."
"type 2 diabetes t2d is a major public health concern worldwide and there has been increasing attention on the role of natural dietary drugs in diabetes therapy.
however the effects of these drugs on gut microbial composition functional potentials and metabolisms remain unclear.
here we conducted integrated 16s rrna sequencing and metabolomic analyses in t2d gk rats and healthy wistar rats that exposed to four natural dietary drugs highly porous activated carbon wheatgrass dandelion and corn stigma.
oral administration of activated carbon and dandelion decreased the body weight gain in both highfat diet hfd gk rats and wistar rats.
significantly lower level of blood glucose was observed in gk rats with activated carbon intervention.
a group of beneficial bacteria and metabolites were promoted and the endotoxinproducing bacteria were inhibited by dietary drugs especially for the activated carbon diet.
oral administration of activated carbon resulted in metabolic changes and antiinflammatory effects that decreased both highfat dietinduced obesity and diabetes.
the beneficial effects of increased positive responders are related to improved carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism regulated inflammatory mediators with simultaneous reduction of detrimental compounds such as lipopolysaccharide lps synthesis and modification of the gut microbiome.
these findings highlight the effectiveness of natural dietary drugs with a particular emphasis on activated carbon and establish a foundation for tailoring the use of these drugs in t2d therapy."
"there is a growing number of articles about conversational ai i.e.
chatgpt for generating scientific literature reviews and summaries.
yet comparative evidence lags its wide adoption by many clinicians and researchers.
we explored chatgpt’s utility for literature search from an enduser perspective through the lens of clinicians and biomedical researchers.
we quantitatively compared basic versions of chatgpt’s utility against conventional search methods such as google and pubmed.
we further tested whether chatgpt usersupport tools i.e.
plugins webbrowsing function promptengineering and customgpts could improve its response across four common and practical literature search scenarios"
"emerging evidence suggests that nrf2 plays a procarcinogenic role in cancer.
our previous study showed that arsenicinduced nrf2 activation triggers metabolic reprogramming leading to the formation of cancer stemlike cells.
here we further demonstrated that klf4 a key pluripotency factor is a direct transcriptional target of nrf2 in arsenicexposed human bronchial epithelial cells.
chipseq analysis identified multiple nrf2 binding peaks at the klf4 gene locus which overlap with the enhancer markers h3k4me1 and h3k27ac.
nrf2 knockout reduced both klf4 expression and enhancer marker enrichment accompanied by a global decrease in klf4 binding across the genome.
in wildtype wt cells arsenic treatment increased klf4 binding on genes involved in oncogenic pathways such as stat3 sox2 nrf2 cell growth hedgehog and emt.
we also found that klf4 engages in a selffeedback loop in response to nrf2 signaling.
lastly our data showed that the cooccupancy of nrf2 and klf4 is crucial for establishing active enhancer hubs in the genome.
these findings suggest that the oncogenic effects of nrf2 are in part mediated by nrf2 dependent selfamplification of klf4 expression and function.
thus targeting both nrf2 and klf4 could be a promising therapeutic strategy for eliminating cancer stemlike cells."
"bcell acute lymphoblastic leukemia ball is characterized by the malignant burgeoning of abnormal bcell lymphoblasts.
in recent years the use of cart therapy which targets cd19 antigen present on the surface of bcells has gained significant attention as a treatment option against aggressive and refractory forms of ball.
however the loss of cd19 antigen on bcell surface due to aberrant splicing under therapy pressure has been suggested as one of the main factors for the emerging cart therapy resistance.
herein using rtpcr based splice assays we examined cd19 splicing patterns in 43 primary pediatric ball patient samples spread across various subtypes.
we observed that cd19 isoform lacking exon 56 exists in  55 of pediatric patients at the initial diagnosis stage itself.
using insilico analysis we identified rna binding proteins rc3h1 and mbnl1 as potential regulators of exon 56 skipping.
furthermore qrtpcr analysis in patient samples revealed that rc3h1 and mbnl1 are significantly upregulated in samples exhibiting exon 56 skipping.
taken together we for the first time report the existence of aberrantly spliced cd19 isoform lacking exon 56 in primary pediatric patients and this occurrence could potentially result from rc3h1 and mbnl1 dysregulation."
"dataindependent acquisition diabased mass spectrometry is becoming an increasingly popular mass spectrometry acquisition strategy for carrying out quantitative proteomics experiments.
most of the popular dia search engines make use of in silico generated spectral libraries.
however the generation of highquality spectral libraries for dia data analysis remains a challenge particularly because most such libraries are generated directly from datadependent acquisition dda data or are from in silico prediction using models trained on dda data.
in this study we developed carafe a tool that generates highquality experimentspecific in silico spectral libraries by training deep learning models directly on dia data.
we demonstrate the performance of carafe on a wide range of dia datasets where we observe improved fragment ion intensity prediction and peptide detection relative to existing pretrained dda models."
"origin of eukaryotes is one of the key problems in evolutionary biology.
the demonstration that the last eukaryotic common ancestor leca already contained the mitochondrion an endosymbiotic organelle derived from an alphaproteobacterium and the discovery of asgard archaea the closest archaeal relatives of eukaryotes inform and constrain evolutionary scenarios of eukaryogenesis.
we undertook a comprehensive analysis of the origins of the core eukaryotic genes tracing to the leca within a rigorous statistical framework centered around evolutionary hypotheses testing using constrained phylogenetic trees.
the results reveal dominant contributions of asgard archaea to the origin of most of the conserved eukaryotic functional systems and pathways.
a limited contribution from alphaproteobacteria was identified primarily relating to the energy transformation systems and fes cluster biogenesis whereas ancestry from other bacterial phyla was scattered across the eukaryotic functional landscape without consistent trends.
these findings suggest a model of eukaryogenesis in which key features of eukaryotic cell organization evolved in the asgard ancestor followed by the capture of the alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont and augmented by numerous but sporadic horizontal acquisition of genes from other bacteria both before and after endosymbiosis."
"despite the high burden of vectorborne disease in subtropical areas few information are available regarding the diversity of tick and tickborne pathogens circulating in the caribbean.
management and control of vectorborne disease require actual epidemiological data to better assess and anticipate the risk of reemergence of tickborne diseases in the region.
to simplify and reduce the costs of such largescale surveys we implemented a highthroughput microfluidic realtime pcr system suitable for the screening of the main bacterial and parasitic genera involved in tickborne disease and potentially circulating in the area.
we used the new screening tool to perform an exploratory epidemiological study on 132 specimens of"
"purpose highthroughput sequencing has revolutionized genetic disorder diagnosis but variant pathogenicity interpretation is still challenging.
even though the human genome variation society hgvs provides recommendations for variant nomenclature  discrepancies in annotation remain a significant hurdle.
methods this study evaluated the annotation concordance between three toolsannovar snpeff and variant effect predictor vepusing 164549 twostar variants from clinvar.
the analysis used hgvs nomenclature stringmatch comparisons to assess annotation consistency from each tool corresponding coding impacts and associated acmg criteria inferred from the annotations.
results the analysis revealed variable concordance rates with 58.52 agreement for hgvsc 84.04 for hgvsp and 85.58 for the coding impact.
snpeff showed the highest match for hgvsc 0.988 while vep bettered for hgvsp 0.977. the substantial discrepancies were noted in the lossoffunction lof category.
incorrect pvs1 interpretations affected the final pathogenicity and downgraded plp variants annovar 55.9 snpeff 66.5 vep 67.3 risking false negatives of clinically relevant variants in reports.
conclusions these findings highlight the critical challenges in accurately interpreting variant pathogenicity due to discrepancies in annotations.
to enhance the reliability of genetic variant interpretation in clinical practice standardizing transcript sets and systematically crossvalidating results across multiple annotation tools is essential."
"splithalotag can be used to transform transient molecular interactions into permanent marks through chemical labeling thereby enabling the recording of transient physiological events in individual cells.
however applications of splithalotagbased recorders can be limited by slow labeling rates.
to address this issue we have engineered an improved version of cphaloδ the larger fragment of the splithalotag system.
using computational techniques we identified stabilizing point mutations and designed a structured linker connecting the original n and c termini of the circular permutated protein thereby significantly improving thermostability and activity of cphaloδ.
these modifications decrease the time and substrate concentrations required for splithalotagbased assays and can expand their dynamic range and sensitivity."
"we conducted a genomewide crisprcas9 screen in suspension 293f cells transduced with raav5.
the highly selected genes revealed after two rounds of screens included the previously reported kiaa039l tm9sf2 and rnf121 along with a cluster of genes involved in glycan biogenesis golgi apparatus localization and endoplasmic reticulum penetration.
in this report we focused on solute carrier family 35 member a1 slc35a1 a golgi apparatuslocalized cytidine 5monophosphatesialic acid cmpsia transporter.
we confirmed that slc35a1 knockout ko significantly decreased raav5 transduction to a level lower than that observed in kiaa0319l or tm9sf2 ko cells.
although slc35a1 ko drastically reduced the expression of α26linked sia on the cell surface the expression of α23linked sia as well as the cell binding and internalization of raav5 were only moderately affected.
moreover slc35a1 ko significantly diminished the transduction of aav multiserotypes including raav2 and raav3 which do not utilize sias for primary attachment.
notably the slc35a1 ko markedly increased transduction of raav9 and raav11 which primarily attach to cells via binding to galactose.
further analyses revealed that slc35a1 ko significantly decreased vector nuclear import.
more importantly although the cterminal cytoplasmic tail deletion ∆c tail mutant of slc35a1 did not drastically decrease sia expression it significantly decreased raav transduction as well as vector nuclear import suggesting the ctail is critical in these processes.
furthermore the t128a mutant significantly decreased sia expression but still supported raav transduction and nuclear import.
these findings highlight the involvement of the cmpsia transporter in the intracellular trafficking of raav vectors postinternalization."
"the bamenda santa and tiko health districts are in the highest malaria transmission strata of cameroon.
the purpose of this study was to explore the indicators of ownership and utilisation as well as maintenance of longlasting insecticidal nets llins in three health districts in cameroon.
a crosssectional household survey involving 1251 households was conducted in the bamenda santa and tiko health districts in cameroon.
a structured questionnaire was used to collect data on llins ownership utilisation and maintenance as well as demographic characteristics.
the average number of llins per household was higher in the bamenda health district bhd compared to the tiko health district thd 2.5±1.4 vs 2.4±1.6 as well as the household ownership of at least one llin 93.3 vs. 88.9. the proportion of the  population with universal utilisation was higher in bhd compared to thd 13.1 vs 0.2. in multinomial regression analysis households in the santa health district shd or  0.4 95  c.i 0.2 – 0.8   6.10×10 were less likely to own at least one llin while those in the bhd or  1.3 95  c.i 0.8 – 2.1   0.33 were more likely to maintain llins compared to those in thd.
ownership of llins was low in shd and thd in comparison to the goal of one llin for every two household members.
overall llins coverage and accessibility was still low after the free mass distribution campaigns making it difficult for all household members to effectively use llins."
"the ratio of predatortoprey biomass density is not constant along ecological gradients denser ecosystems tend to have fewer predators per prey following a scaling relation known as the predatorprey power law.
the origin of this surprisingly general pattern particularly its connection with environmental factors and predatorprey dynamics is unknown.
here we explore some ways that a sublinear predatorprey scaling could emerge from densitydependent interactions among predators and between predators and prey which we call a topdown origin rather than among prey bottomup origin as proposed in hatton  2015. we combine two complementary theoretical approaches.
first we use phenomenological differential equations to explore the role of environmental parameters and dynamical properties in controlling the predatorprey ratio.
second we simulate an agentbased model with tunable predator selfregulation to investigate the emergence of predatorprey scaling from plausible microscopic rules.
while we cannot rule out alternative explanations our results show that densitydependent mechanisms relative to predation and intraspecific predator interactions including prey saturation predator interference and predator selfregulation offer potential explanations for the predatorprey power law."
"the florida mottled duck anas fulvigula fulvigula is a unique subspecies of waterfowl whose range is limited to peninsular florida usa.
as an endemic species florida mottled ducks face numerous conservation stressors such as habitat conversion and hybridization with nonnative mallards anas platyrhynchos.
in addition to these numerous stressors mottled ducks are also contending with emerging andor geographically expanding waterborne pathogens such as vibrio spp.
due to the effects of climate change.
however even given their conservation needs little is known with respect to the health physiology and the immunity of wild mottled ducks in florida.
given this lack of data we performed health assessments of mottled ducks in the central florida area.
specifically we examined the humoral innate immune system i.e.
plasma of mottled ducks in response to a common but extraneous pathogen escherichia coli strain atcc number 8739. we utilized a bactericidal assay bka commonly used in ecoimmunology to provide insight into the bactericidal capacities of captured florida mottled ducks.
we statistically tested the bka capacity of 23 mottled ducks in response to age and whole blood lead levels pb.
we found that there was no statistically significant relationship between the covariates we measured and mottled duck bka capacity against e. coli.
however the variability we observed in the bka capacity of this subspecies warrants further research into additional physiological and ecological covariates coupled with potential immune stressors that florida mottled ducks may be contending with."
"background immune checkpoint inhibitor ici therapy efficacy varies among cancer patients necessitating precise predictive biomarkers for optimized treatment strategies.
methods we developed the adaptive best subset selection algorithm and genetic algorithm aided ensemble learning agae score through multicohort transcriptomic analysis of icitreated patients.
the agae score incorporated genepairing adaptive best subset selection for feature optimization and a genetic algorithm for optimal basic learner identification.
we explored correlations between agae score and immune microenvironments using multiomics data.
potential targets were screened using 17 crispr datasets and validated through in vitro and in vivo experiments.
results the agae score demonstrated robust predictive power for ici therapy outcomes with lower scores correlating with enhanced treatment response.
the agae score outperformed published signatures and conventional biomarkers.
lower agae scores were associated with increased immune cell infiltration higher immunogenicity and enhanced antitumor immune activity.
the cep55 was identified as a potential key target driving immune evasion through agae scoring and crispr screening.
experimental validation showed cep55 downregulation attenuated tumor cell malignancy and augmented ici therapy efficacy by modulating t cell responses.
conclusions the agae score was a potent predictor of ici therapy efficacy facilitating refined patient stratification.
cep55s role in the tumor microenvironments immune response highlights its potential as a therapeutic target.
targeted interventions against cep55 may improve immunotherapy precision."
"motility is a hallmark of life′s dynamic processes enabling cells to actively chase prey repair wounds and shape organs.
recreating these intricate behaviors using welldefined molecules remains a major challenge at the intersection of biology physics and molecular engineering.
although the polymerization force of the actin cytoskeleton is characterized as a primary driver of cell motility recapitulating this process in protocellular systems has proven elusive.
the difficulty lies in the daunting task of distilling key components from motile cells and integrating them into model membranes in a physiologically relevant manner.
to address this we developed a method to optically control actin polymerization with high spatiotemporal precision within cellmimetic lipid vesicles known as giant unilamellar vesicles guvs.
within these active protocells the reorganization of actin networks triggered outward membrane extensions as well as the unidirectional movement of guvs at speeds of up to 0.43 μmmin comparable to typical adherent mammalian cells.
notably our findings reveal a synergistic interplay between branched and linear actin forms in promoting membrane protrusions highlighting the cooperative nature of these cytoskeletal elements.
this approach offers a powerful platform for unraveling the intricacies of cell migration designing synthetic cells with active morphodynamics and advancing bioengineering applications such as selfpropelled delivery systems and autonomous tissuelike materials."
"niches are often found in specific positions in tissues relative to the stem cells they support.
consistency of niche position suggests that placement is important for niche function.
however the complexity of most niches has precluded a thorough understanding of how their proper placement is established.
to address this we investigated the formation of a genetically tractable niche the drosophila posterior signaling center psc the assembly of which had not been previously explored.
this niche controls hematopoietic progenitors of the lymph gland lg.
psc cells were previously shown to be specified laterally in the embryo but ultimately reside dorsally at the lg posterior.
here using liveimaging we show that psc cells migrate as a tight collective and associate with multiple tissues during their trajectory to the lg posterior.
we find that slit emanating from two extrinsic sources visceral mesoderm and cardioblasts is required for the psc to remain a collective and for its attachment to cardioblasts during migration.
without proper slitrobo signaling psc cells disperse form aberrant contacts and ultimately fail to reach their stereotypical position near progenitors.
our work characterizes a novel example of niche formation and identifies an extrinsic signaling relay that controls precise niche positioning."
"the activation of gene circuits can impose a significant burden on cells leading to heterogeneous expression and reduced productivity.
in this work we focused on the t7 production system in e. coli bl21 a prime example of a burdensome gene circuit to investigate the main cause for this gene expression heterogeneity and methods to mitigate it.
based on continuous cultivation analyzed and control by automated flow cytometry we quantified the tradeoff between cellular growth and gene expression and tracked the celltocell heterogeneity in gene expression measured as entropy.
we concluded that the growth reduction associated to the activation of the burdensome gene circuit i.e.
the switching cost is at the origin of the population heterogeneity.
the loss of growth rate imposed by the burdensome activation of the gene is compensated at the population level by the overgrowth of less induced cells that safeguard the population by generating entropy.
we tried to homogenize the population by pulsing the inducer with increasing frequency but found that the population escapes control through promoter mutation leading to a genotype exhibiting reduced gene expression but also reduced entropy.
to engineer a more homogeneous population without sacrificing gene expression we decreased the switching cost associated to the induction by lowering the quality of the main carbon source.
this strategy successfully led to a more homogeneous and productive population.
our approach allows for a precise quantification of the tradeoff between growth and gene expression in cell population cultivated under dynamic conditions and highlights the importance of the switching cost for designing efficient approaches of cell population control."
"in vitro construction of selfreproducible artificial systems is a major challenge in bottomup synthetic biology.
here we developed a reconstituted system capable of sustainably regenerating all 20 aminoacyltrna synthetases aarss which are major components of the translation system.
to achieve this we needed five types of improvements 1 optimization of aars sequences for efficient translation 2 optimization of the composition of the translation system to enhance translation 3 employment of another bacterial alars and serrs to improve each aminoacylation activity 4 diminishing the translational inhibition caused by certain aars sequences by codon optimization and efp addition and 5 balancing the dna concentrations of 20 aarss to match each requirement.
after these improvements we succeeded in the sustainable regeneration of all 20 aarss for up to 20 cycles of 2.5fold serial dilutions.
these methodologies and results provide a substantial advancement toward the realization of selfreproducible artificial systems."
"amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 4 als4 is an autosomal dominant motor neuron disease that is molecularly characterized by reduced rloop levels and caused by pathogenic variants in  .
encodes an rnadna helicase that resolves threestranded nucleic acid structures called rloops.
currently there are no diseasemodifying therapies available for als4.
given that  is haplosufficient removing the product of the mutated allele presents a potential therapeutic strategy.
we designed a series of sirnas to selectively target the rna transcript from the als4 allele containing the c.1166tc mutation p.leu389ser.
transfection of hek293 cells with sirna and plasmids encoding either wildtype or mutant leu389ser epitope tagged setx revealed that three sirnas specifically reduced mutant setx protein levels without affecting the wildtype setx protein.
in als4 primary fibroblasts sirna treatment silenced the endogenous mutant  allele while sparing the wildtype allele and restored rloop levels in patient cells.
our findings demonstrate that mutant  differing from wildtype by a single nucleotide can be effectively and specifically silenced by rna interference highlighting the potential of allelespecific sirna as a therapeutic approach for als4."
"wild relatives of wheat are valuable sources for enhancing the genetic diversity of common wheat.
aegilops comosa an annual diploid species with an mm genome constitution possesses numerous agronomically valuable traits that can be exploited for wheat improvement.
in this study we report a chromosomelevel genome assembly of ae.
comosa accession pi 551049 generated using pacbio highfidelity hifi reads and highthroughput chromosome conformation capture hic data.
the assembly spans 4.47 gb featuring a contig n50 of 23.59 mb and a scaffold n50 of 619.05 mb.
a total of 39063 gene models were annotated through a combination of homoeologous proteins isoseq and rnaseq data.
comparative genome analysis revealed a terminal intrachromosomal translocation in chromosome 2m of ae.
comosa and ae.
umbellulata compared to its homoeologous chromosomes in other diploid wheat species.
phylogenetic analysis showed a close relationship between ae.
comosa and ae.
umbellulata.
this newly constructed reference genome of ae.
comosa will serve as an important genomic resource for comparative genomic studies and the cloning of agriculturally important genes."
"communication between the cytoplasm and the nucleus requires a continuous exchange of molecules across the nuclear envelope ne.
the nuclear pore complex npc is the gateway embedded in the ne through which cargo moves while transport receptors mediate the passage of macromolecules through the npc.
although their essential role as the components of the nuclear transport machinery has been extensively studied how these factors respond to developmental and environmental cues has been underexplored.
here we tag the nucleoporin nup96 and the transport receptor impβ with megfp and mscarleti at their endogenous loci in drosophila.
we demonstrate the functionality of these markers in multiple tissues and offer new options for better visualization of nuclear morphology in densely packed complex tissues.
then we characterize the spatiotemporal dynamics of these markers in multiple developmental contexts.
we find that nup96 and impβ form cytoplasmic puncta whose size numbers and colocalization patterns change dynamically during oogenesis and early embryogenesis.
moreover we find that the abundance of npcs per nucleus decreases during early embryogenesis complementing the emerging model in which npcs play a regulatory role in development.
the tools and observations described here will be useful in understanding the dynamic regulation of nuclear morphology and transport machinery in development."
"the manchette is a transient microtubule based structure that plays a vital role in nuclear shaping during spermiogenesis.
it comprises thousands of microtubules mts that build a scaffold around the distal half of the nucleus.
the manchette distributes proteins and vesicles during spermiogenesis in a process called intramanchette transport imt.
the current hypothesis is that imt shares many similarities with intraflagellar transport ift and utilizes both mts and filamentous actin factin.
however imt is still poorly understood as direct visualization of imt complexes is missing and the presence of factin has not been experimentally shown.
here we use proteomics and cryogenicelectron tomography cryoet to identify and visualize imt components.
we find that factin is an integral part of the manchette with two different spatial organizations namely bundles and single filaments providing tracks for transport as well as having structural and mechanical roles.
we further uncover that imt on mts is mediated by two distinct transport machineries dynein mediated transport of soluble cargo and dynein independent transport for vesicles.
our results provide new insights into the manchettes function as a transport scaffold highlighting its significance for the polarization of spermatids during spermiogenesis."
"plant organ growth involves significant deformation of cell walls with the mechanical behavior of these walls particularly the epidermal cell walls playing a crucial role in plant morphogenesis.
to gain insights into the mechanics of plant growth it is vital to study and quantify the largedeformation mechanical properties of the epidermal cell walls in the context of development.
to this end we investigated the mechanical response of the arabidopsis leaf epidermis to stretching.
the epidermis exhibited a nonlinear stiffening behavior that naturally fell into three regimes.
each regime also corresponded with distinct nonlinear behaviors in terms of transverse deformation i.e.
poisson effect and unrecoverable deformation i.e.
plasticity.
we found that these properties arise not from the geometric structure of the epidermal cells but rather from the cell wall material which behaves as a fibrous network material.
using a fivebeam model we demonstrated that these nonlinear behaviors result from the transition from reorientation and bendingdominated to stretchdominated deformation modes of cellulose microfibrils.
we further explored how these mechanical properties change during development and found stiffening behavior is more pronounced at later developmental stage.
finally our investigation into the"
"chronic arsenic exposure can lead to various health issues including cancer.
concerns have been mounting about the enhancement of arsenic toxicity through coexposure to various prevalent lifestyle habits.
smokeless tobacco products are commonly consumed in south asian countries where their use frequently cooccurs with exposure to arsenic from contaminated groundwater.
to decipher the in vitro molecular and cellular responses to arsenic andor smokeless tobacco we performed temporal multiomics analysis of the transcriptome and dna methylome remodelling in exposed htertimmortalized human normal oral keratinocytes nok as well as arsenic andor smokeless tobacco genotoxicity and mutagenicity investigations in nok cells and in human p53 knockin murine embryonic fibroblasts hupki mef.
rnaseq results from acute exposures to arsenic alone and in combination with smokeless tobacco extract revealed upregulation of genes with roles in cell cycle changes apoptosis and inflammation responses.
this was in keeping with global dna hypomethylation affecting genes involved in the same processes in response to chronic treatment in nok cells.
at the phenotypic level we observed a dosedependent decrease in nok cell viability induction of dna damage cell cycle changes and increased apoptosis with the most pronounced effects observed under arsenic and slt coexposure conditions.
livecell imaging experiments indicated that the dna damage likely resulted from induction of apoptosis an observation validated by a lack of exomewide mutagenesis in response to chronic exposure to arsenic andor smokeless tobacco.
in sum our integrative omics study provides novel insights into the acute and chronic responses to arsenic and smokeless tobacco coexposure with both types of responses converging on several key mechanisms associated with cancer hallmark processes.
the generated rich catalogue of molecular programs in oral cells regulated by arsenic and smokeless tobacco coexposure may provide bases for future development of biomarkers for use in molecular epidemiology studies of exposed populations at risk of developing oral cancer."
"biomaterial coatings and films can prevent premature failure and enhance performance of chronically implanted medical devices.
however current hydrophilic polymer coatings and films have significant drawbacks including swelling and delamination.
to address these issues we modified hydroxyethyl cellulose with thioether groups to generate an oxidationresponsive polymer hecmtp.
hecmtp readily dissolves in green solvents and can be fabricated as coatings or films with tunable thicknesses.
hecmtp coatings effectively scavenge hydrogen peroxide resulting in conversion of thioether groups to sulfoxide groups on the polymer chain.
oxidationdriven hydrophobictohydrophilic transitions that are isolated to the surface of hecmtp coatings under physiologically relevant conditions increase wettability decrease stiffness and reduce protein adsorption to generate a nonfouling interface with minimal coating delamination or swelling.
hecmtp can be used in diverse optical applications and permits oxidationresponsive controlled drug release.
hecmtp films are nonresorbable in vivo and evoke minimal foreign body responses.
these results highlight the versatility of hecmtp and support its incorporation into chronically implanted medical devices."
"members of the ralstonia solanacearum species complex are soilborne pathogens of important crop plants.
strainlevel host specialisation is considered typical yet outbreak monitoring in martinique revealed a new lineage with dramatically expanded host range had emerged.
our analysis shows the outbreak in martinique was caused by the expansion of lineages from two different ralstonia species.
one lineage is of asian origin and retains a signature of host specialisation while the emergent broad host range lineage originated in the americas.
the presence of similar integrative and conjugative elements ices in both lineages suggests they are exchanging genetic material.
the emergent lineage acquired novel prophage along with genes encoding novel catalytic and metabolic functions but shows little variation among the virulence proteins considered host specificity determinants.
we postulate that host range expansion is not caused by the evolution of a virulence strategy targeting host immunity but is rather due to the acquisition of novel pathways for substrate metabolism enhancing pathogen fitness in soil or plant tissues."
"cellular adaptations to change often involve posttranslational modifications of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins.
an example found in protists and plants is the modification of serine and threonine residues of dozens to hundreds of nucleocytoplasmic proteins with a single fucose ofuc.
a nucleocytoplasmic ofucosyltransferase oft occurs in the pathogen toxoplasma gondii the social amoeba dictyostelium and higher plants where it is called spy because mutants have a spindly appearance.
ofucosylation which is required for optimal proliferation of toxoplasma and dictyostelium is paralogous to the oglcnacylation of nucleocytoplasmic proteins of plants and animals that is involved in stress and nutritional responses.
ofuc was first discovered in toxoplasma using aleuria aurantia lectin but its broad specificity for terminal fucose residues on n and olinked glycans in the secretory pathway limits its use.
here we present affinity purified rabbit antisera that are selective for the detection and enrichment of proteins bearing fucoseoser or fucoseothr.
these antibodies detect numerous nucleocytoplasmic proteins in toxoplasma dictyostelium and arabidopsis as well as ofuc occurring on secretory proteins of mammalian and dictyostelium cells although the latter are sometimes capped by further glycosylation.
the antibodies label toxoplasma acanthamoeba and dictyostelium  in a pattern reminiscent of oglcnac in animal cells including nuclear pores.
the ofucome of dictyostelium is partially conserved with that of toxoplasma and is highly induced during starvationinduced development.
these antisera demonstrate the unique antigenicity of ofuc document conservation of the ofucome among unrelated protists and will enable the study of the ofucomes of other organisms possessing oftlike genes."
"lead a toxic heavy metal is prevalent in various industrial applications contributing to environmental contamination and significant health concerns.
lead affects various body systems especially the brain causing longlasting cognitive and behavioral changes.
while most studies have focused on continuous lead exposure intermittent exposure such as that caused by migration or relocations has received less attention.
importantly lead exposure intensifies the severity of parkinson’s disease pd and dementia with lewy bodies diseases involving the accumulation of alphasynuclein asyn in the brain and in the gut.
although the precise mechanisms underlying these observations remain unclear oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction likely play a role.
here we investigated how two different profiles of lead exposure  continuous and intermittent  affect models of synucleinopathies.
we found that lead exposure enhances the formation of asyn inclusions resulting in an increase in both their number and size in cell models.
in addition we found that animals injected with asyn preformed fibrils display serine 129phosphorylated asyn inclusions and a reduction in astrocytes in the substantia nigra.
these animals also display neuronal damage and alterations in locomotor activity exploratory behavior anxiety memory impairments and hypertension.
our results suggest a mechanistic link between environmental lead exposure and the onset and progression of diseases associated with asyn pathology.
understanding the molecular and cellular interactions between lead and asyn is crucial for shaping public health policies and may provide novel insight into strategies for mitigating the impact of environmental toxins on neurodegenerative processes involved in parkinson’s disease and related synucleinopathies."
"the sarscov2 main protease mpro or nsp5 is critical for the production of functional viral proteins during infection and like many viral proteases can also target host proteins to subvert their cellular functions.
here we show that the human trna methyltransferase trmt1 can be recognized and cleaved by sarscov2 mpro.
trmt1 installs the n2n2dimethylguanosine m22g modification on mammalian trnas which promotes global protein synthesis and cellular redox homeostasis.
we find that mpro can cleave endogenous trmt1 in human cell lysate resulting in removal of the trmt1 zinc finger domain.
trmt1 proteolysis results in elimination of trmt1 trna methyltransferase activity and reduced trna binding affinity.
evolutionary analysis shows that the trmt1 cleavage site is highly conserved in mammals except in muroidea where trmt1 is likely resistant to cleavage.
in primates regions outside the cleavage site with rapid evolution could indicate adaptation to ancient viral pathogens.
furthermore we determined the structure of a trmt1 peptide in complex with mpro revealing a substrate binding conformation distinct from the majority of available mpropeptide complexes.
kinetic parameters for peptide cleavage show that the trmt1526536 sequence is cleaved with comparable efficiency to the mprotargeted nsp89 viral cleavage site.
mutagenesis studies and molecular dynamics simulations together indicate that kinetic discrimination occurs during a later step of mpromediated proteolysis that follows substrate binding.
our results provide new information about the structural basis for mpro substrate recognition and cleavage the functional roles of the trmt1 zinc finger domain in trna binding and modification and the regulation of trmt1 activity by sarscov2 mpro.
these studies could inform future therapeutic design targeting mpro and raise the possibility that proteolysis of human trmt1 during sarscov2 infection suppresses protein translation and oxidative stress response to impact viral pathogenesis."
"proper stem cell targeting and differentiation is necessary for regeneration to succeed.
in organisms capable of whole body regeneration considerable progress has been made identifying wound signals initiating this process but the mechanisms that control the differentiation of progenitors into mature organs are not fully understood.
using the planarian as a model system we identify a novel function for  a map3k family member possessing both kinase and ubiquitin ligase domains to negatively regulate terminal differentiation of stem cells during eye regeneration.
inhibition of  caused the formation of multiple ectopic eyes within the head but without controlling overall head brain or body patterning.
by contrast other known regulators of planarian eye patterning like  and  also regulate head regionalization suggesting  acts distinctly.
eye resection and regeneration experiments suggest that unlike wnt signaling perturbation  inhibition did not shift the target destination of eye formation in the animal.
instead  ectopic eyes emerge in the regions normally occupied by migratory eye progenitors and the onset of ectopic eyes after  inhibition coincides with a reduction to eye progenitor numbers.
furthermore rnai dosing experiments indicate that progenitors closer to their normal target are relatively more sensitive to the effects of  implicating this factors in controlling the site of terminal differentiation.
eye phenotypes were also observed after inhibition of  and  identifying a putative pathway through which  prevents differentiation.
together these results suggest that  regulates a novel control point in the eye regeneration pathway which suppresses the terminal differentiation of progenitors during their migration to target destinations."
" flower morphology influences the wiring of plantpollinator interaction networks.
flowers with deep corolla tubes and bilateral symmetry have a narrower pollinator range hence are considered more specialized than shallow radial flowers.
past interspecific comparisons revealed positive correlations between flower depth and nectar production rates in a few plant communities suggesting that specialized flowers may allocate more resources into food rewards for pollinators."
"cellular shape is intimately linked to cell function and state and transitions between cell states are tightly coupled to shape changes.
yet shape has been largely overlooked in state transitions studies.
here we combine morphometric analysis with theoretical modeling and molecular perturbations to interrogate cell shape dynamics during epithelialtomesenchymal transition emt.
using stochastic inference we extract the morphogenetic landscape underlying emt.
we show that within this landscape emtassociated cell spreading reflects a transition between shape attractors.
strikingly we observe a peak in cell shape noise strength concomitant with spreading and show that higher shape noise accelerates transitions between shape attractors.
our analysis framework will be widely applicable to quantitative cell shape investigations in physiology and disease.
together our results identify a key role for cellular stochasticity as a regulator of shape change rates and highlight that shape dynamics yield rich phenotypic information that enhance our understanding of cellular states."
"background pregnancy outcomes are influenced by maternal distress but the pathways underlying these effects are still unknown.
mitochondria crucial for stress adaptation and energy production may link psychosocial stress to its biological effects especially during pregnancy when energy demands significantly increase.
this study explores two mitochondrial markerscirculating cellfree mitochondrial dna cfmtdna and growth differentiation factor15 gdf15as potential mitochondrial health indicators linking maternal distress to pregnancy outcomes in two longitudinal studies from the usa and turkey.
methods we analyzed biological demographic and psychological data from women in two pregnancy studies epi n187 usa mean age29.6sd6.2 and babip n198 turkey mean age32.4sd4.0.
data were collected at multiple time points during the perinatal period including late 2nd and 3rd trimester with epi also including additional data at early 2nd trimester and 414 months postpartum.
prenatal maternal psychological distress was measured as perceived stress anxiety and depressive symptoms.
plasma cfmtdna and gdf15 levels were assessed using qpcr and elisa respectively.
statistical analyses included wilcoxon signedrank tests spearman correlations and mannwhitney tests.
results plasma cfmtdna levels did not change significantly during pregnancy in either study.
plasma gdf15 levels increased from early to late pregnancy in both studies and significantly decreased postpartum in epi.
perinatal maternal distress in the late 2nd and 3rd trimesters was not associated with cfmtdna or gdf15 in either study.
metabolic distress measured as higher prepregnancy bmi was negatively correlated with gdf15 in the late 2nd trimester in epi and showed a similar trend in babip.
similarly higher maternal psychological distress in the early 2nd trimester were associated with lower cfmtdna and a trend for lower gdf15 in epi.
finally higher prepregnancy bmi and maternal distress in late pregnancy were linked to a smaller decline in gdf15 from late pregnancy to postpartum in epi suggesting an interaction between metabolic stress prenatal distress and postpregnancy physiological recovery.
conclusions this study identified distinct patterns of plasma cfmtdna and gdf15 levels during the perinatal period across studies from two countries revealing unique associations between maternal characteristics prenatal distress and pregnancy outcomes suggesting that maternal distress can interact with energy mobilization during pregnancy."
"tumor stiffening plays a pivotal role in cancer progression.
increased tumor stiffness resulting from interactions between cancer cells and their surrounding microenvironment alters the tumors mechanical properties and significantly impacts cancer growth and metastasis the primary cause of cancerrelated deaths.
despite the importance of tumor stiffness systematic studies exploring its effect on proteomic profiles are limited.
in this study focused on colorectal cancer we show that matrix stiffness significantly alters the expression of secreted proteins while intracellular protein levels remain largely unaffected.
functional assays reveal that the changes in the secretome driven by matrix stiffness enhance cell migration angiogenesis and matrix remodeling which collectively contribute to a more aggressive cancer phenotype.
our findings emphasize the critical role of matrix stiffness in driving colorectal cancer progression through changes in the secretome offering valuable insights for the development of biomechanical cancer therapies."
"bacteriophages can be important drivers of bacterial densities and therefore microbial community composition and function.
these ecological interactions are likely to be greatly affected by evolutionary dynamics because bacteria can rapidly evolve resistance to phage while phage can reciprocally evolve to increase infectivity.
most studies to date have explored ecoevolutionary dynamics using isolated pairs of bacteriaphage but in nature multiple bacteria and phages coexist and coevolve simultaneously.
how coevolution plays out in this context is poorly understood.
here we examine how three coexisting soil bacteria ochrobactrum sp.
pseudomonas sp.
and variovorax sp.
interact and evolve with three speciesspecific bacteriophages over eight weeks of experimental evolution both as hostparasite pairs in isolation and as a mixed community.
across all species phage resistance evolution was inhibited in polyculture with the most pronounced effect on ochrobactrum.
between bacteriaphage pairs there were also substantial differences in the effect of phage on host densities and evolutionary dynamics including whether pairs coevolved.
these contrasts emphasise the difficulty in generalising from monoculture to polyculture and between bacteriaphage pairs to wider systems.
future studies should consider how multiple bacteria and phage pairs interact simultaneously to better understand how coevolutionary dynamics happen in natural communities."
"the neonatal mouse cerebellum shows remarkable regenerative potential upon injury at birth wherein a subset of nestinexpressing progenitors neps undergoes adaptive reprogramming to replenish granule cell progenitors that die.
here we investigate how the microenvironment of the injured cerebellum changes upon injury and contributes to the regenerative potential of normally gliogenicneps and their adaptive reprogramming.
single cell transcriptomic and bulk chromatin accessibility analyses of the neps from injured neonatal cerebella compared to controls show a temporary increase in cellular processes involved in responding to reactive oxygen species ros a known damageassociated molecular pattern.
analysis of ros levels in cerebellar tissue confirm a transient increased one day after injury at postanal day 1 overlapping with the peak cell death in the cerebellum.
in a transgenic mouse line that ubiquitously overexpresses human mitochondrial catalase mcat ros is reduced 1 day after injury to the granule cell progenitors and we demonstrate that several steps in the regenerative process of neps are curtailed leading to reduced cerebellar growth.
we also provide evidence that microglia are involved in one step of adaptive reprogramming by regulating nep replenishment of the granule cell precursors.
collectively our results highlight that changes in the tissue microenvironment regulate multiple steps in adaptive reprogramming of neps upon death of cerebellar granule cell progenitors at birth highlighting the instructive roles of microenvironmental signals during regeneration of the neonatal brain."
"a wealth of excellent training and educational materials for the computational life sciences are scattered around the internet but they can be hard to find.
many materials reside in public git repositories that are hosted on platforms such as github and gitlab.
glittr.org is a manually curated database of git repositories which enables users to find educational materials that would otherwise be hard to identify.
with the application users can search and compare educational materials based on topic and author but also on engagement metrics such as stargazers bookmarks and recency days since last commit.
glittr.org currently contains 664 entries which are assigned to six different categories within the domain of computational life sciences.
by analysing the database we reveal insights in the availability of materials per topic collaboration patterns of developers and licensing practices.
this knowledge helps to understand in which areas open educational materials are scant the importance of git for collaboration on educational materials and how licensing can be improved to enhance sharing and reuse.
taken together we show that glittr.org contains a wealth of connected and openly available metadata.
therefore it enhances adherence to the fair findable accessible interoperable reusable principles which benefits learners teachers and trainers in the entire life sciences community and beyond."
"dna gyrase is a type iia topoisomerase that can create temporary doublestranded dna breaks to regulate dna topology and an archetypical target of antibiotics.
the widely used quinolone class of drugs use a watermetal ion bridge in interacting with the gyra subunit of dna gyrase.
zoliflodacin sits in the same pocket as quinolones but interacts with the gyrb subunit and also stabilizes lethal doublestranded dnabreaks.
gepotidacin had been observed to sit on the twofold axis of the complex midway between the two four basepair separated dnacleavage sites and has been observed to stabilize singestranded dnabreaks.
here we use information from three crystal structures of complexes of  dna gyrase one with a precursor of gepotidacin and one with the progenitor of zoliflodacin to propose a simple single moving metalion catalyzed dnacleavage mechanism.
our model explains why the catalytic tyrosine is in the tyrosinate negatively charged form for dnacleavage.
movement of a single catalytic metalion mg or mn"
"genes expressed in gametes that mediate sperm interaction with the mammalian egg are of considerable interest to evolutionary biologists because the evolution of such genes can account for variation in reproductive compatibility between mates and reproductive isolation between species.
the human orthologs of such genes are also potential targets for both contraception and treatment of infertility.
one gene system of particular interest is the spermbinding genes of the inner egg coat or zona pellucida  and their cognate protein in the mouse sperm acrosome .
previous population genetic analyses in humans pointed toward three balanced polymorphisms one in each gene  and  as potential targets of some form of balancing selection in the evolution of human fertility.
we tested that association using genetic analysis of couples seeking fertility assistance but we could not reject the null hypothesis of no association between balanced polymorphisms and infertility.
our study was based on a small sample of couples but the data were sound the allele frequencies at those three balanced polymorphisms were not different from random expectation in that clinical sample.
if an effect of those allele frequencies on infertility exists it is probably small.
our study was based in part on an old error in gene annotation that was only recently discovered after the start of participant recruitment for this genetic analysis and this error may account for our results which argue against a role for balancing selection on those three genes in humans."
 lead contact
"the tomato mating system was strongly affected by domestication events.
mutations disrupting selfincompatibility paralleled by changes retracting the stigma position sp within the staminal cone conferred strict autogamy and selffertility to the cultivated forms.
although major genes affecting these changes have been identified sp control in domesticated forms retaining a noninserted or a heatinducible sp needs elucidation.
to widen the possibility of identifying sp genetic determinants we analysed the trait in four populations two germplasm collections a multiparental recombinant inbred and a biparental progeny under different environmental conditions normal and heat stressed.
overall 36 markers significantly associated with the trait were discovered.
several colocalizations were found both among regions firstly reported in this work and among them and previously reported positions.
this supported the reliability of the analysis.
three of such regions in the long arms of chromosome 1 8 and 11 were validated in an independent segregating population and candidate genes in confidence intervals were identified among transcription factors and hormone stress and cellwallrelated genes.
in conclusion the work supported the hypothesis that the sp phenotype is controlled by different keygenes in tomato paving the way to identifying novel players and novel mechanisms involved in the regulation of herkogamy."
"the translation of global cellular proteins is almost completely repressed in cells with flavivirus infection while viral translation remains efficient.
the mechanisms of flaviviruses evade host translational shutoff are largely unknown.
here we identified viral elements and host factors associated with jev evasion of host shutoff.
jev 5′utr lacked ires or ireslike activity while noncapped 5′utr initiated translation in the presence of 3′utr.
furthermore the elements db2 and shpsl within 3′utr were involved in the regulation of capindependent translation which is conserved in the genus"
"cancer is a complex disease characterized by genetic and molecular diversity often involving dysregulation of critical cellular pathways.
recent advances in pancancer research have highlighted the importance of shared oncogenic mechanisms across different cancer types providing new avenues for therapeutic exploration.
protein kinases particularly those involved in phagocytosis play pivotal roles in cellular homeostasis and immune response.
this study systematically examines the genetic alterations and expression profiles of protein kinases associated with phagocytosis across various cancer types using data from the cancer genome atlas tcga and other publicly available resources.
we analyzed single nucleotide variations snvs copy number variations cnvs methylation patterns and mrna expression to identify recurring alterations and their associations with survival outcomes.
our findings reveal that met and mertk are the most frequently mutated genes with missense mutations dominating across cancers.
cnv analysis shows significant correlations with survival in cancers like ucec kirp and kirc while methylation analysis indicates cancerspecific regulatory patterns affecting gene expression.
differential expression analysis highlights distinct cancertypespecific expression profiles with genes like met and btk displaying significant variation.
crosstalk pathway analysis further reveals the involvement of these kinases in key cancerrelated pathways such as epithelialmesenchymal transition emt and apoptosis.
drug sensitivity analysis identifies potential therapeutic targets with gene expression correlating significantly with cancer cell line responsiveness to specific compounds.
these findings underscore the importance of the phagocytotic kinome in cancer biology and suggest potential therapeutic strategies targeting protein kinases to enhance immune response and improve treatment outcomes."
"in many terrestrial insects the onset of metamorphosis marks a transition from humid to dry environments.
yet how metamorphosing insect pupae protect themselves against the threat of dehydration remains unclear.
here we identify the chemical composition and biosynthetic origins of a lipid desiccation barrier specific to the pupal and sexuallyimmature adult stages of .
this barrier comprises unisex hyperlong hydrocarbons 2937 carbons in length which are synthesized by larval oenocytes and stored in the larval fat body before being deployed on the pupal and young adult cuticles.
we show that the fatty acid elongase  is required for the biosynthesis of hyperlong hydrocarbons that are essential for the barrier to water loss during metamorphosis.
across the  genus many species express unisex profiles of hyperlong hydrocarbons and as young adults transition to sexspecific shorter hydrocarbons with known pheromonal functions.
the desert species  however retains hyperlong hydrocarbons during adulthood likely as an adaptation to an arid environment.
our study reveals how the cuticular lipid barrier is tuned to meet changing environmental pressures during insect development and evolution."
clinicaltrials.gov transcranial alternating current stimulation in back pain pilot study
"shifts in life history traits such as timing of reproduction can help mediate population declines following perturbations and early reproduction should be favoured when adult survival is impacted more than juvenile survival.
in tasmanian devils following the emergence of a fatal transmissible cancer females started to breed precocially i.e.
at age one instead of typically age two and the same time as populations started to decline following disease emergence.
here we focus on a diseased site freycinet peninsula tasmania australia with 18 years of continuous markrecapture data to test  whether rates of precocial breeding in females continued to increase after the initial rise after the emergence of the disease  whether there was a relationship between body size and breeding success for either oneyearolds or adult females i.e.
at least twoyearsold and  whether there was inbreeding depression in breeding success for either age category.
we show that rates of precocial breeding did not continue to rise and that the proportion of precocially breeding females has plateaued at around 50. we also show that there was no effect of body size on the probability of breeding for either oneyearold or for adult females.
finally we show that there was no evidence for inbreeding depression in breeding success for either age class.
we discuss possible constraints that may have inhibited further rise in rates of precocial breeding in the context of limitations to growth in the offspring of precocially breeding and therefore smaller females."
"the microbiome is a hidden organ system with diverse metabolic roles.
using bacteroides thetaiotaomicron b theta as a model we asked how microbiome species process iron the quintessential biometal supporting respiration and life as we know it when iron is provided in complex with protoporphyrin ix ppix as heme.
canonical pathways for reclaiming hemeiron from host cells or the diet require o2 which is unavailable in the gi tract and many pathological microenvironments.
hmus a homolog of cobalamine vitamin b12 and chlorophyllbuilding chelatases is widespread in anaerobic microbial ecosystems.
in this work we provide direct physiological biochemical and structural evidence for the anaerobic removal of iron from heme by hmus a dechelatase that deconstructs heme to ppix and feii.
we show that heme can be used as a sole iron source by b theta yielding ppix and that hmus inactivation under these conditions is lethal.
iron removal from heme depends on the b theta membrane fraction nadh and o2 exclusion.
absorbance spectra indicate that heterologously expressed hmus is isolated with a nonsubstrate heme bound and can accommodate multiple heme equivalents under saturating conditions.
solution of the cryoem structure reveals heme and two cations at sites that are conserved across the hmus family and the chelatase superfamily respectively.
the proposed structurebased mechanism for iron removal further links biosynthetic and biodegradative pathways for heme chlorophyll and vitamin b12 3 ancient and biologically crucial metallocofactors."
"while mrna vaccines have been effective in combating sarscov2 waning of vaccineinduced antibody responses and lack of vaccineinduced respiratory tract immunity contribute to ongoing infection and transmission.
in this work we compare and contrast intranasal i.n.
and intramuscular i.m.
administration of a sarscov2 selfamplifying rna sarna vaccine delivered by a nanostructured lipid carrier nlc.
both i.m.
and i.n.
vaccines induce potent systemic serum neutralizing antibodies bone marrowresident iggsecreting cells and splenic t cell responses.
the i.n.
vaccine additionally induces robust respiratory mucosal immune responses including sarscov2reactive lungresident memory and lunghoming t cell populations.
as a booster following previous i.m.
vaccination the i.n.
vaccine also elicits the development of mucosal virusspecific t cells.
both the i.m.
and i.n.
administered vaccines durably protect hamsters from infectionassociated morbidity upon viral challenge significantly reducing viral loads and preventing challenged hamsters from transmitting virus to naive cagemates.
this sarnanlc vaccines potent systemic immunogenicity and additional mucosal immunogenicity when delivered i.n.
may be key for combating sarscov2 and other respiratory pathogens."
"small interfering rna sirnas hold immense promise for treating cardiac and muscular diseases but robust and scalable delivery to these tissues remains a challenge.
recent advances in delivery strategies to muscle include conjugation of biologics antibodyantibody fragments peptides which are currently in clinical development.
however the manufacturing of biologicsirna conjugates is a challenging and complex process.
by contrast lipophilic sirnas are readily chemically synthesized at scale and support sufficient cardiac and skeletal muscle delivery.
in this work we refine sirna design elements to enhance potency and durability and support clinically relevant silencing in muscle.
applying this strategy for sirnas targeting myostatin  a key target in musclewasting conditions we show that a single subcutaneous dose in mice achieved robust and durable silencing ∼80 inhibition up to 6 weeks ∼30 at 14 weeks.
biweekly dosing resulted in 95 reduction of circulating  for half a year with no observed systemic or targetrelated toxicity.
inhibition resulted in muscle growth and increased lean muscle mass correlating with improved grip strength.
interestingly the functional impact on muscle growth and strength significantly outlasts the target silencing suggesting extended pharmacological effects.
systemic administration was equally efficacious in all muscle groups tested including skeletal muscle heart tongue and diaphragm.
the informational nature of the muscleactive chemically defined sirna scaffold was confirmed by demonstrating muscle and heart efficacy with three additional targets.
our findings pave the way for potent and longlasting gene modulation in muscle using chemically defined lipophilic sirnas offering a new avenue for treating muscular diseases."
"during cell division dna replication stalls upon alcoholderived interstrand crosslink employing dna repair pathways.
acetaldehyde a toxic metabolite of alcohol can induce dna crosslinks between complementary dna strands causing significant genomic instability.
the repair of acetaldehyde dna crosslinks aaicls is vital for maintaining genome integrity and preventing mutagenic events.
the fanconi anemia fa repair pathways involvement in fixing the aaicls is crucial ensuring cellular homeostasis and safeguarding genomic stability.
dysregulation of the fa pathway has been linked to fanconi anemia a rare genetic disorder characterized by hypersensitivity to dnadamaging agents including acetaldehyde.
however the precise mechanism of the repair and incision of aaicls is unknown.
here we demonstrate the role of the fa pathway nuclease slx4xpfercc1 sxe in the repair of aaicl.
we have generated sitespecific aaicl within the replication fork and we found sxe to excise the crosslink from the replication fork bringing evidence of its role in the repair of alcoholinduced dna lesions.
this nuclease complex performs two precise incisions around the lesion.
we also demonstrate that the sxe nuclease excises an abasic site interstrand crosslink in a similar manner.
given the evidence in conjunction with previous repair studies that have been conducted our work suggests that sxe is a versatile nuclease complex."
"in recent decades the mediterranean sea has experienced a marked escalation in the introduction of nonnative and invasive marine species.
the global expansion of aquaculture coupled with the increased movement of commercial species has raised concerns about the potential for introducing parasites into new environments posing a growing threat to marine ecosystems.
polydora websteri is a shell boring polydorin worm that induces the formation of mudfilled blisters within the shells of molluscs.
the annelid is considered indigenous to the asian coasts and has been documented in various locations across the globe.
in the present work we report a massive presence of p. websteri in several sites of the north adriatic costline and we provide some diagnostic features that are useful to identify the species.
polydora websteri can be distinguished of a lateral flange on chaetiger 5. moreover the palps are characterized by continuous black lines along the margins of the ciliated groove.
the combined findings of this study provide compelling evidence that p. websteri is expanding its range within the mediterranean coast.
given the potential for severe ecological and economic impacts associated with this invasive polychaete this study serves as an urgent call to action for increased monitoring of p. websteri in both farmed and wild pacific oysters in the mediterranean sea.
identification key of mediterranean polydora is provided."
"background the baroreflex system is crucial for cardiovascular regulation and autonomic homeostasis.
a comprehensive assessment requires understanding the simultaneous temporal dynamics of its multiple functional branches which traditional methods often overlook.
objective to develop and validate a noninvasive method for simultaneously assessing the temporal dynamics of sympathetic and parasympathetic baroreflexes using pulse contour analysis and the sequence method.
methods beattobeat blood pressure and ecg recordings were analyzed from 55 preoperative cardiothoracic surgery patients in the supine position and 21 subjects from the eurobavar dataset in both supine and standing positions.
systolic arterial pressure sap interbeat interval ibi cardiac output co myocardial contraction dpdtmax and systemic vascular resistance svr were estimated using pulse contour analysis.
baroreflex sensitivity brs was calculated via the sequence method and correlated with hemodynamic and heart rate variability hrv parameters.
results parasympathetic brs for ibi was correlated with the root mean square of successive differences of ecg rr intervals rmssdhrv at 0beat delay.
sympathetic brs for svr strongly correlated with svr co and rmssdhrv particularly at 3beat delay and was uniquely associated with sap at 1beat delay.
sympathetic brs for dpdtmax correlated with dpdtmax at 1beat delay.
in contrast brs for co correlated with co and svr at 0 and 3beat delays.
postural changes mainly affected parasympatheticallymediated brs for ibi and to a lesser extent the sympathetic vascular and myocardial branches.
conclusions this method effectively captures multiple baroreflex responses and their temporal dynamics revealing distinct autonomic mechanisms and the impact of postural changes.
further validation is warranted."
"synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists scras represent a class of new psychoactive substances that pose great health risks attributed to their wideranging and severe adverse effects.
recent evidence has shown that scras with key moieties can confer superagonism yet this phenomenon is still not well understood.
in this study we developed a structureactivity relationship sar for scra superagonism by comparing eight compounds differing by their head moiety lvalinate vs. lleucinate core moiety indole vs. indazole and tail moiety 5fluoropentyl vs. 4fluorobenzyl through different modes of bioluminescence resonance energy transfer bret.
we found that lleucinate head moiety and indazole core moiety conferred superagonism across multiple gα proteins and βarrestin 2. finally after generating cb1r mutant constructs we found that transmembrane 2 tm2 interactions to the head moiety of tested scras at f170 f177 and h178 are key to eliciting activity."
"background hypercoagulation and thrombin generation are major risk factors for venous thrombosis.
sustained thrombin signaling through par4 promotes platelet activation phosphatidylserine exposure and subsequent thrombin generation.
a singlenucleotide polymorphism in par4 rs2227376 changes proline to leucine extracellular loop 3 p310l which decreases par4 reactivity and is associated with a lower risk for venous thromboembolism vte in a gwas metaanalysis.
objective the goal of this study is to determine the mechanism for the association of rs2227376 with reduced risk for vte in using mice with a homologous mutation par4p322l.
methods venous thrombosis was examined using our recently generated par4p322l mice in the inferior vena cava stasis and stenosis models.
coagulation and clot stability was measured using rotational thromboelastometry rotem.
thrombin generating potential was measured in plateletrich plasma.
phosphatidylserine surface expression and plateletneutrophil aggregates were analyzed using flow cytometry.
results par4pl and par4ll had reduced incidence and size of venous clots at 48 hours.
par4pl and par4ll platelets had progressively decreased phosphatidylserine in response to thrombin and convulxin which led to decreased thrombin generation and decreased par4mediated plateletneutrophil aggregation.
conclusions the leucine allele in extracellular loop 3 par4322l leads to fewer procoagulant platelets and decreased endogenous thrombin potential.
this decreased ability to generate thrombin offers a mechanism for par4s role in vte highlighting a key role for par4 signaling"
"nad is modulated by conditions of metabolic stress and has been reported to decline with aging but human data are sparse.
nicotinamide riboside nr supplementation ameliorates metabolic dysfunction in rodents.
we aimed to establish whether oral nr supplementation in aged participants can increase the skeletal muscle nad metabolome and questioned if tissue nad levels are depressed with aging.
we supplemented 12 aged men with nr 1g per day for 21days in a placebocontrolled randomized doubleblind crossover trial.
targeted metabolomics showed that nr elevated the muscle nad metabolome evident by increased nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide and nicotinamide clearance products.
muscle rna sequencing revealed nrmediated downregulation of energy metabolism and mitochondria pathways.
nr also depressed levels of circulating inflammatory cytokines.
in an additional study p magnetic resonance spectroscopybased nad measurement in muscle and brain showed no difference between young and aged individuals.
our data establish that oral nr is available to aged human muscle and identify antiinflammatory effects of nr while suggesting that nad decline is not associated with chronological aging"
"our understanding of soil microarthropod acari and collembola community assembly and dynamics is somewhat limited compared to aboveground communities.
understanding the processes involved in assembly and the spatial scales at which they occur would help answer the age old question of how so many species and individuals can coexist in soil.
we use  a microcosm experiment using intact soil cores to explore the processes of selection and dispersal taking place at the microspatial scale.
we do this by manipulating available pore space and population density which allows us to indirectly investigate the role of dispersal and biotic interactions in shaping microarthropod community dynamics.
results suggest that there are processes limiting abundance and that communities are sometimes held at abundances below those which the environment could accommodate by abiotic factors.
food and space did not appear to drive the observed patterns however findings suggest that abiotic factors may influence dynamics in the field."
"polycystic ovarian syndrome pcos symptoms include excessive body or facial hair irregular periods reduced fertility and reoccurring pregnancy loss.
hyperandrogenism and chronic inflammation are hallmarks of pcos which is diagnosed by analysing steroid hormones in the blood.
studies suggest that bioactive lipids are contributing to chronic inflammation.
to research pcos animal models such as letrozole and dihydrotestosteronetreated rats are used.
they display similar ovarian and metabolic characteristics although plasma lipid profiles have not been determined.
therefore in order to validate the use of these models for pcos we have optimised a mass spectrometry based targeted lipidomics workflow which increases the sensitivity of measuring these lipids in rat plasma.
our analysis shows that letrozole caused a significant elevation of 5αandrostene317dione and testosterone.
dihydrotestosterone treatment resulted in increased dehydroepiandrosteronesulphate and allopregnanolone but a reduction in testosterone progesterone pregnenolone and dsphingosine.
in both models 25hydroxycholesterol and leukotriene c4 were significantly diminished and 4cholesten3one was significantly increased and these particular metabolites are not known to be changed in human pcos.
these results suggest that the plasma lipids of these rodent models have some changes akin to human pcos and other changes that are not."
"the singlecelled cyanobacterium synechococcus elongatus generates circadian rhythms with exceptional fidelity and synchrony despite their femtoliter volumes.
here we explore the mechanistic aspects of this fidelity by reconstituting the kaiabc posttranslational oscillator pto in cellmimetic giant vesicles guvs under welldefined conditions in vitro.
pto proteins were encapsulated with a coefficient of variation that closely matched protein variations observed in live cells.
using fluorescently labeled kaib and confocal microscopy we were able to measure circadian rhythms generated by thousands of encapsulated ptos at the singlevesicle level for several days as a function of protein concentration and guv size.
we find that pto fidelity decreased with decreasing levels of encapsulated pto proteins and in smaller guvs.
we also observed that in encapsulated ptos a significant fraction of kaib localized to guv membranes like it does in cyanobacteria.
a mathematical model that uses empirical bulk concentration and stoichiometry limitations suggests that cyanobacteria overcome challenges to fidelity by expressing high levels of pto proteins along with the cika and sasa proteins which buffer stochastic variations in the levels of kaia and kaib respectively.
further the model suggests that the transcriptiontranslation feedback loop ttfl contributes at most a small percentage to the overall fidelity of the cyanobacterial circadian clock under constant conditions but is essential for maintaining phase synchrony.
our results are the first experimental demonstration of populations of synthetic cells that can autonomously keep circadian time.
additionally the approach of using bulk relationships to understand complex phenomena in celllike systems could be useful for understanding other collective behavior important in biology such as liquidliquid phase separation."
throughout evolution most
" this work was supported by the hatch project accession no.
1015969 from the usda national institute of food and agriculture"
"delineating a protein’s essential and dispensable domains provides critical insight into how it carries out its function.
here we developed a highthroughput method to synthesize and test the functionality of all possible inframe and continuous deletions in a gene of interest enabling rapid and unbiased determination of protein domain importance.
our approach generates precise deletions using a crispr library framework that is free from constraints of grna target site availability and efficacy.
we applied our method to acriia4 a phageencoded anticrispr protein that robustly inhibits spcas9.
extensive structural characterization has shown that acriia4 physically occupies the dnabinding interfaces of several spcas9 domains nonetheless the importance of each acriia4 interaction for spcas9 inhibition is unknown.
we used our approach to determine the essential and dispensable regions of acriia4.
surprisingly not all contacts with spcas9 were required and in particular we found that the acriia4 loop that inserts into spcas9’s ruvc catalytic domain can be deleted.
our results show that acriia4 inhibits spcas9 primarily by blocking pam binding and that its interaction with the spcas9 catalytic domain is inessential."
"the structure of compound eyes in arthropods has been the subject of many studies revealing important biological principles.
however until recently these studies were constrained by the twodimensional nature of available ultrastructural data.
here by taking advantage of the novel threedimensional ultrastructural dataset obtained using volume electron microscopy vem we present the first cellularlevel reconstruction of the whole compound eye of an insect the extremely miniaturized parasitoid wasp .
the compound eye of the female  consists of 29 ommatidia and contains 478 cells.
despite the almost anucleate brain all cells of the compound eye possess nuclei.
like in larger insects the dorsal rim area dra of the  eye contains ommatidia that putatively specialize in the polarized light detection as reflected in their corneal and retinal morphology.
we report the presence of three ‘ectopic’ photoreceptors.
our results offer new insights into the miniaturization of compound eyes and scaling of sensory organs in general."
"fluorescence microscopy is ubiquitously used in cell biology research to characterize the cellular role of a protein.
to help elucidate the relationship between the amino acid sequence of a protein and its cellular function we introduce celldiff a unified diffusion model facilitating bidirectional transformations between protein sequences and their corresponding microscopy images.
utilizing reference cell morphology images and a protein sequence celldiff efficiently generates corresponding protein images.
conversely given a protein image the model outputs protein sequences.
celldiff integrates continuous and diffusion models within a unified framework and is implemented using a transformerbased network.
we train celldiff on the human protein atlas hpa dataset and finetune it on the opencell dataset.
experimental results demonstrate that celldiff outperforms existing methods in generating highfidelity protein images making it a practical tool for investigating subcellular protein localization and interactions."
"macromolecular protein complexes carry out most functions in the cell including essential functions required for cell survival.
unfortunately we lack the subunit composition for all human protein complexes.
to address this gap we integrated 25000 mass spectrometry experiments using a machine learning approach to identify  15000 human protein complexes.
we show our map of protein complexes is highly accurate and more comprehensive than previous maps placing 75 of human proteins into their physical contexts.
we globally characterize our complexes using protein covariation data proteomehd.2 and identify covarying complexes suggesting common functional associations.
our map also generates testable functional hypotheses for 472 uncharacterized proteins which we support using alphafold modeling.
additionally we use alphafold modeling to identify 511 mutually exclusive protein pairs in hu.map3.0 complexes suggesting complexes serve different functional roles depending on their subunit composition.
we identify expression as the primary way cells and organisms relieve the conflict of mutually exclusive subunits.
finally we import our complexes to emblebis complex portal httpswww.ebi.ac.ukcomplexportalhome as well as provide complexes through our hu.map3.0 web interface httpshumap3.proteincomplexes.org.
we expect our resource to be highly impactful to the broader research community."
"using children’s drawings to understand children’s concept learning has been proven to be an effective method but there are still two major problems in previous research 1. the drawings heavily relies on the task so the ecological validity of the conclusions is low 2. the subjective interpretation of drawings is inevitable.
to address these problems this study uses the large language model llm to identify the drawing contents of 1096 children’s scientific drawings covering 6 scientific concepts and uses the word2vec algorithm to calculate their semantic similarity.
the study explores whether there are consistent drawing representations among children with the same theme and attempts to establish a norm for children’s scientific drawings providing a baseline reference for following children’s drawing research.
the results showed that there were significant differences in the consistency of children’s representations of different concepts and there was a possibility of consistency bias that is the appearance of consistency representations misled llm.
at the same time linear regression tests were used to analyze the relevant factors that affect children’s representation.
the results show that sample size and teaching strategies can affect the accuracy of llm’s image recognition while the degree of conceptual abstraction may affect the consistency of representation."
"genome editing ge is widely recognized as an effective and valuable technology in life sciences research.
however certain genes are difficult to edit depending on some factors such as the type of species sequences and ge tools.
therefore confirming the presence or absence of ge practices in previous publications is crucial for the effectively design and establishment of research using ge.
although the genome editing metadatabase gem httpsbonohu.hiroshimau.ac.jpgem aims to provide as comprehensive ge information as possible it does not indicate how each registered gene is involved in ge.
in this study we developed a systematic method for extracting essential ge information using large language models from the information based on gem and gerelated articles.
this approach allows for a systematic and efficient investigation of ge information that cannot be achieved using the current gem alone.
in addition by converting the extracted ge information into metrics we propose a potential application of this method to prioritize genes for future research.
the extracted ge information and novel gerelated scores are expected to facilitate the efficient selection of target genes for ge and support the design of research using ge."
"understanding the interaction between t cell receptors tcrs and peptidebound major histocompatibility complexes pmhcs is crucial for comprehending immune responses and developing targeted immunotherapies.
while recent machine learning ml models show remarkable success in predicting tcrpmhc binding within training data these models often fail to generalize to peptides outside of their training distributions raising concerns about their applicability in therapeutic settings.
understanding and improving the generalization of these models is therefore critical to ensure realworld applications.
to address this issue we evaluate the effect of the distance between training and testing peptide distributions on ml model empirical risk assessments using sequencebased and 3d structurebased distance metrics.
in our analysis we use several stateoftheart models for tcrpeptide binding prediction attentive variational information bottleneck avib nettcr2.0 and 2.2 and ergo ii pretrained autoencoder and ergo ii lstm.
in this work we introduce a novel approach for assessing the generalization capabilities of tcr binding predictors the distance split ds algorithm.
the ds algorithm controls the distance between training and testing peptides based on both sequence and structure allowing for a more nuanced evaluation of model performance.
we show that lower 3d shape similarity between training and test peptides is associated with a harder outofdistribution task definition which is more interesting when measuring the ability to generalize to unseen peptides.
however we observe the opposite effect when splitting using sequencebased similarity.
these findings highlight the importance of using a distancebased splitting approach to benchmark models.
this could then be used to estimate a confidence score on predictions on novel and unseen peptides based on how different they are from the training ones.
additionally our results may hint that employing 3d shape to complement sequence information could improve the accuracy of tcrpmhc binding predictors."
"utrs contain crucial regulatory elements for rna stability translation and localization so their integrity is indispensable for gene expression.
approximately 3.7 of genetic variants associated with diseases occur in utrs yet a comprehensive understanding of utr variant functions remains limited due to inefficient experimental and computational assessment methods.
to systematically evaluate the effects of utr variants on rna stability we established a massively parallel reporter assay on 6555 utr variants reported in human disease databases.
we examined the rna degradation patterns mediated by the utr library in two cell lines and then applied lasso regression to model the influential regulators of rna stability.
we found that ua dinucleotides and uarich motifs are the most prominent destabilizing element.
gain of ua dinucleotide outlined mutant utrs with reduced stability.
studies on endogenous transcripts indicate that high uadinucleotide ratios in utrs promote rna degradation.
conversely elevated gc content and protein binding on ua dinucleotides protect highua rna from degradation.
further analysis reveals polarized roles of uadinucleotidebinding proteins in rna protection and degradation.
furthermore the uadinucleotide ratio of both utrs is a common characteristic of genes in innate immune response pathways implying a coordinated stability regulation through utrs at the transcriptomic level.
we also demonstrate that stabilityaltering utrs are associated with changes in biobankbased health indices underscoring the importance of precise utr regulation for wellness.
our study highlights the importance of rna stability regulation through utr primary sequences paving the way for further exploration of their implications in gene networks and precision medicine."
"structured rnas have emerged as a major component of cellular regulatory systems but their mechanism of action is often poorly understood.
riboswitches are structured rnas that allosterically regulate gene expression through any of several different mechanisms.
in vitro approaches to characterizing mechanism are costly lowthroughput and must be repeated for each individual riboswitch locus of interest.
bioinformatic methods promise higher throughput despite robust computational identification of riboswitches however computational classification of riboswitch mechanism has so far been both modelbound relying on identification of sequence motifs known to be required for specific models of riboswitch activity and empirically untested with predictions far outpacing biological validation.
here we introduce tartlet transcriptionallyactive riboswitch tracer leveraging edge detection a new highthroughput tool that recovers in vivo patterns of riboswitchmediated transcription termination from pairedend rnaseq data using edge detection methods.
tartlet successfully extracts transcription termination signals despite numerous sources of biological and technical noise.
we tested the effectiveness of tartlet on riboswitches identified from a wide range of sequenced bacterial taxa by utilizing publicly available pairedend rnaseq readsets finding broad agreement with previously published in vitro characterization results.
in addition we use tartlet to infer the in vivo regulatory mechanism of uncharacterized riboswitch loci from existing public data.
tartlet is available on github and can be applied to pairedend rnaseq datasets from isolates or complex communities."
"the western honey bee or apis mellifera is a vital pollinator essential for both ecosystems and agriculture worldwide.
as human influences on these bees become more pronounced understanding their pollen foraging behavior is increasingly important.
pollen provides crucial nutrients for a. mellifera such as protein and lipids that are necessary for hive health and prosperity.
pollen dna metabarcoding allows for the longitudinal analysis of the floral sources of corbicular beecollected pollen.
in this study we employ the use of metabarcoding and oxford nanopore sequencing technology to analyze the floral composition of pollen samples collected on a weekly basis from two closely related hives.
in total we identified 74 distinct plant taxa at the genus level between the two hives.
although both hives had equivalent values of taxonomic richness and diversity the majority of taxa identified were unique to the individual hives.
this indicates a large degree of variation in pollen foraging despite the hives relative proximity.
in addition to this interhive analysis we also analyzed changes in pollen origin of a single hive across the course of five months.
we identified 59 distinct plant taxa within samples from this hive whose presence and relative abundance differ drastically on a weekly basis with no taxa being present in all samples across the observed time period.
in addition even though there was a median of 8 to 9 taxa detected in each sample each sample was composed primarily of 1 to 2 taxa indicating a degree of foraging preference that changes on a regular basis.
further quantitative and qualitative comparisons completed in this study demonstrate the degree of variation in pollen foraging patterns both throughout the season and between hives."
"traitbased ecology considerably increased our comprehension of various fields related to ecology and evolution.
as measuring traits can be timeconsuming and costly analyses regularly gather trait data from databases instead of carrying out new measurements.
however intraspecific trait variability can cause considerable differences between the trait values of different population and regions.
here we evaluated whether intraspecific trait variability causes considerable differences in trait values measured in two different regions of europe.
we tested whether regionally measured trait data from the pannonian ecoregion differ from trait data of the same species originating from northwestern europe by comparing data from the pannonian database of plant traits padapt and the leda traitbase.
we evaluated six traits of the same set of species thousandseed mass tsm seed bank persistence index sbpi leaf area la leaf dry matter content ldmc specific leaf area sla and leaf dry mass.
we found that trait data from the two databases significantly differed for tsm sbpi sla and ldmc.
our results indicate that the markedly different climate of the two regions can cause substantial intraspecific trait variation therefore the geographical origin of trait data matters in traitbased analyses.
the findings corroborate the assumption that regionally measured trait data and building regional databases are essential for reliable regionalscale traitbased studies.
we conclude that for studies analysing traits in the pannonian ecoregion and possibly in easter and central europe in general it is advisable to use padapt instead of databases compiling data from regions with markedly different climatic conditions."
"gout is a prevalent form of inflammatory arthritis that occurs due to high levels of uric acid in the blood leading to the formation of urate crystals in and around the joints particularly affecting the elderly.
recent research has provided evidence of distinct differences in the gut microbiota of patients with gout and hyperuricemia when compared to healthy individuals.
however the link between gut microbiota and agerelated gout remained underexplored.
our study found that gut microbiota plays a crucial role in determining susceptibility to agerelated gout.
specifically we observed that agerelated gut microbiota regulated the activation of the nlrp3 inflammasome pathway and modulated uric acid metabolism.
more scrutiny highlighted the positive impact of younger microbiota on the gut microbiota structure of old or aged mice enhancing butanoate metabolism and butyric acid content.
experimentation with butyrate supplementation indicated that butyric acid exerts a dual effect inhibiting inflammation in acute gout and reducing serum uric acid levels.
these insights emphasize the potential of gut microbiome rejuvenation in mitigating senile gout unraveling the intricate dynamics between microbiota aging and gout.
it potentially serves as a therapeutic target for senile goutrelated conditions."
"hibernation has evolved several times in mammals to overcome harsh winter climates and food scarcity.
during hibernation animals undergo extreme shifts in metabolic rate heart rate respiration and body temperature.
these changes reduce energy consumption and allow animals to survive solely on their fat reserves.
understanding the mechanisms for these extreme shifts has long been recognized as a model for translational medicine as hibernators do not exhibit the same adverse effects of extended immobility that nonhibernating mammals suffer.
though work on individual species has illuminated important mechanisms of these functional changes the genomic basis of this phenotype remains largely unknown and few studies have drawn on comparative work to elucidate commonalities across diverse hibernating mammals.
synthesizing both single species and comparative approaches we use metabolomic data from active and denning black bears ursus americanus to guide bioinformatic analyses of genes using tests of selection and evolutionary rate convergence across independent lineages of hibernating mammals.
we identify several genes with significant signatures of selection and evolutionary rate convergence in hibernators that represent both previously known and novel genetic mechanisms of the hibernation phenotype.
these data provide novel insights into the genetic basis of this adaptation and serve to direct clinical research in hibernationbased therapies."
"salmonella typhimurium stm is a globally prevalent pathogen.
we compiled a dataset comprising 65000 publicly available stm isolates and analysed the predictedresistance to 15 key antibiotics.
additionally we typed all isolates using a standardized typing method multilevel genome typing mgt and characterised the resistance profiles by mgt sequence types st. we identified 407 mgt sts wherein at least 80 of the isolates were nonsusceptible to at least one antibiotic.
for the key antibiotics prescribed for severe salmonellosis we identified three ciprofloxacin nonsusceptible mgt sts and eight cefotaxime nonsusceptible mgt sts in the last two years of the dataset 20212022. while the ciprofloxacin nonsusceptible mgt sts comprised isolates predominantly from the uk only one cefotaxime nonsusceptible mgt st comprised isolates predominantly from uk and associated with swine with others from usa and associated with cattle and poultry.
integration of amr predictions with mgt strain typing provides sharable standardised and specific identification and tracking of resistant isolates.
this integrated analysis presents a unique approach for the global surveillance of antimicrobial resistance and resistant strains."
"the nexus of mobile technology mass media and public engagement is opening new opportunities for research into the human behaviours relevant to the spread of disease.
on 22 march 2018 the british broadcasting corporation bbc released the documentary “contagion the bbc four pandemic” to describe the science behind pandemic preparedness in the uk.
the authors of this article were responsible for producing a mathematical simulation for that documentary of how a highly contagious respiratory pathogen might spread across the uk.
according to the documentary narrative the ‘outbreak’ begins in the town of haslemere england.
to ground the simulation in true human interaction patterns a threeday citizen science experiment was conducted during which the pairwise distances between 469 volunteers in haslemere were tracked continuously using a mobile phone app.
here we offer a scientific companion to the documentary in which we describe the methods behind our simulation and release the pairwise interpersonal distance dataset.
we discuss salient features of the dataset including daily patterns in the clustering and volatility of interpersonal interactions.
our epidemiological analysis of the simulated haslemere outbreak serves as a springboard to discuss scientific opportunities opened by the haslemere dataset and others like it.
we believe that the haslemere dataset will productively challenge current strategies for incorporating population structure into disease transmission models and hope that it will inspire the collection and analysis of other similar datasets in the future."
"tuberose  is a highly valued flower crop in india known for its consistently high returns and ability to thrive in various climatic conditions.
severe outbreaks of the grey pineapple mealybug  beardsley hemiptera pseudococcidae have been observed in several villages of the pune district maharashtra india since 2021 leading to significant economic losses.
this report provides an illustrative morphological diagnosis of  and basic information on its field establishment impact on tuberose crops nature of the damage and field symptoms etc.
surveys conducted in major tuberosegrowing areas of pune district maharashtra revealed that the mealybug primarily infests the underground and basal portion of tuberose plants causing stunted growth drooping and ultimately death of the plants.
produces honeydew fostering sooty mold growth that impairs photosynthesis reduces flower yield.
it also infests tuberose bulbs spoiling them in storage.
based on primary scientific literature this study represents the first scientifically confirmed record of  as a new pest of tuberose in india.
the ant species  was found attending to mealybug colonies aiding their spread and creating a nuisance for farmers during routine field activities.
a total of 87.09 of the surveyed fields n62 showed mealybug infestation ranging from 68 to 97. raising awareness among the farmers and implementing regular monitoring in tuberosegrowing areas are crucial steps for developing effective management practices and preventing the further spread of this pest to other regions."
"embryonic stem cell research has uncovered different requirements for wntβcatenin signalling in human naïve pluripotent cells compared to the mouse paradigm.
it is therefore important to study wntβcatenin signalling directly in models of early human development.
since tcflef factors mediate the regulation of target genes downstream of wntβcatenin signalling we studied the expression and protein localisation of the four tcflef genes by analysing  “snapshots” of human development leveraging naïve and primed pluripotent cells as well as extraembryonic and early embryonic cell lineages.
strikingly we comprehensively confirm clear differences between mouse and human pluripotent stem cells suggesting speciesspecific requirements for wnt signalling that may reflect differences in states of pluripotency.
human naïve es cells express very low tcf7l1 unlike their mouse counterparts.
tcf7l2 is robustly expressed in human naïve esderived trophectoderm cells.
in human primed pluripotent stem cells activation of wntβcatenin signalling is required to induce expression of both  and"
"chronic lower extremity wounds like diabetic foot ulcers dfus are a major complication of diabetes and the leading cause of lower limb amputations worldwide.
currently dfus are diagnosed through macroscopic evaluation and molecular diagnostics are lacking for the disease staging treatment selection and evaluation of treatment success.
there is a need for new diagnostic technologies combined with detection methods for pointofcare use.
preclinical and clinical data support the importance of wound ph as a biomarker in chronic wound healing with dfus typically exhibiting more alkaline ph values when compared to normal healing wounds.
in a previous study we developed a phsensing fluorescent bandage based on pyranineloaded microparticles that were physically immobilized in an alginate hydrogel.
here we present a secondgeneration phsensing bandage for colorimetric wound diagnostics.
pyranine was adsorbed at high concentrations onto microparticles to enable colorimetric signal detection.
this approach leverages pyranines ability to change color in response to ph variations through proton exchange properties with the wound fluid.
the colorimetric properties of our bandage enable signal detection by two methods suited for pointofcare use a smartphone camera and a costeffective homebuilt rgb detector.
analyzing the color intensity of the bandage with red green and blue absorbance values it is possible to correlate the rgb absorbance to a ph value in the clinicallyrelevant range to 6.0 to 9.0 in vitro and ex vivo as the b values decreased with the increase in ph levels as associated with dfus.
these findings indicate the potential of colorimetric detection using smartphone cameras or homebuilt absorbance detectors for rapid wound diagnostics at the pointofcare."
"the effect of replacing the amino acid at a given site in a protein is difficult to predict.
yet evolutionary comparisons have revealed highly regular patterns of interchangeability between pairs of amino acids and such patterns have proved enormously useful in a range of applications in bioinformatics evolutionary inference and protein design.
here we reconcile these apparently contradictory observations using fitness data from over 350000 experimental amino acid replacements.
almost onequarter of the 380 types of replacements have broad distributions of fitness effects dfes that closely resemble the background dfe for random changes indicating an overwhelming influence of protein context in determining mutational effects.
however we also observe that the 380 pairspecific dfes closely follow a maximum entropy distribution specifically a truncated exponential distribution.
the shape of this distribution is determined entirely by its mean which is equivalent to the chance that a replacement of the given type is fitter than a random replacement.
in this type of distribution modest deviations in the mean correspond to much larger changes in the probability of falling in the far right tail so that modest differences in mean exchangeability may result in much larger differences in the chance of a highly fit mutation.
indeed we show that under the assumption that purifying selection filters out the vast majority of mutations the maximum entropy distributions of fitness effects inferred from deep mutational scanning experiments predict the characteristic patterns of amino acid change observed in molecular evolution.
these maximum entropy distributions of mutational effects not only provide a tuneable model for molecular evolution but also have implications for mutational effect prediction and protein engineering."
"protein function inference relies on annotating protein domains via sequence similarity often modeled through profile hidden markov models profile hmms which capture evolutionary diversity within related domains.
however profile hmms make strong simplifying independence assumptions when modeling residues in a sequence.
here we introduce psalm protein sequence annotation using language models a hierarchical approach that relaxes these assumptions and uses representations of protein sequences learned by protein language models to enable highsensitivity highspecificity residuelevel protein sequence annotation.
we also develop the multidomain protein homology benchmark mdphbench a benchmark for protein sequence domain annotation where training and test sequences have been rigorously split to share no similarity between any of their domains at a given threshold of sequence identity.
prior benchmarks which split one domain family at a time do not support methods for annotating multidomain proteins where training and test sequences need to have multiple domains from different families.
we validate psalms performance on mdphbench and highlight psalm as a promising alternative to hmmer a stateoftheart profile hmmbased method for protein sequence annotation."
 the authors declare that there are no known conflicts of interest
"protected areas pas are vital for nature conservation yet evidence shows that pressure on biodiversity is increasing despite their global expansion.
using threat probability maps based on the iucn red list and pa data we analyzed the relationship between pa coverage and the major threats agriculture hunting logging pollution invasive species and urbanization affecting amphibians birds mammals and reptiles.
our analysis includes data on 33379 species and 255848 protected sites.
our results reveal a potential disconnect between global pas and threat tracking often leaving high threat areas insufficiently protected.
over half of the mapped area for amphibians and mammals faces high threat impact probability and insufficient pa cover.
amphibians face the highest proportion of high simultaneous threats and lack sufficient cover.
areas facing a high probability of impact lacking sufficient pa cover also harbor the highest proportion of threatened species across all taxonomic groups.
our research provides crucial insights into the current state of terrestrial pas concerning threats highlighting areas requiring immediate attention and guiding strategic conservation planning."
"chitin polyn acetyl d glucosamine is an abundant polysaccharide produced by fungal cell walls insect epicuticle and nematodes cuticles.
its immunomodulatory function has curious attributes  paradoxically opposing host responses using different host receptors resulting in immunostimulatory or immunosuppressive propertis depending on the sizelength of the oligomers as well as aceytylation levels have been reported in literature.
here we demonstrate that heptanacetyl chitoheptaose 7 mer is a tlr2 ligand  8 mer activates immune cells through tlr4 while 6 mer is a relatively poor ligand for both tlr2 and tlr4 in generating inflammatory host cytokines.
significantly enhanced inflammatory response characterized by increased tnfa il1b il6 and il10 was a feature of only 8 mer while 6 and 7 mers induced modest activation in both hek cells transfected with specific tlrs and in human thp2 cells in vitro.
the translational significance of these features were addressed in an experimental model of sepsis using cecal ligation puncture clp protocol a murine model considered a gold standard for human sepsis.
more significantly therapeutic rather than prophylactic administration that simulates real life scenerio of human and animal sepsis of 7 mer rather than 6 or 8 residues of chitin oligomer significantly protected mice against sepsis as shown by decreased mortality and decreased induction of inflammatory cytokines.
these findings suggest that modulation of immune response by chitopolysaccarides invivo is precisely caliberated."
"single molecule localisation microscopy smlm can provide twodimensional superresolved image datafrom conventional fluorescence microscopes while three dimensional 3d smlm usually involves amodification of the microscope e.g.
to engineer a predictable axial variation in the point spread function.
herewe demonstrate a 3d smlm approach we call easyzloc utilising a lightweight convolutional neuralnetwork that is generally applicable including with standard unmodified fluorescence microscopes andwhich we consider may be practically useful in a high throughput smlm workflow.
we demonstrate thereconstruction of nuclear pore complexes with comparable performance to previously reported methods butwith a significant reduction in computational power and execution time.
3d reconstructions of the nuclearenvelope and a tubulin sample over a larger axial range are also shown."
"interactions between plant pathogens and their hosts are highly dynamic and mainly driven by pathogen effectors and plant receptors.
hostpathogen coevolution can cause rapid diversification or loss of pathogen genes encoding hostexposed proteins.
the molecular mechanisms that underpin such sequence dynamics remains poorly investigated at the scale of entire pathogen species.
here we focus on avrstb6 a major effector of the global wheat pathogen  evolving in response to the cognate receptor stb6 a resistance widely deployed in wheat.
we comprehensively captured effector gene evolution by analyzing a global thousandgenome panel using referencefree sequence analyses.
we found that avrstb6 has diversified into 59 protein isoforms with a strong association to the pathogen spreading to new continents.
across europe we found the strongest differentiation of the effector consistent with high rates of stb6 deployment.
the  locus showed also a remarkable diversification in transposable element content with specific expansion patterns across the globe.
we detected the"
"the central components of the aba core signaling pathway are families of receptors clade a type 2c protein phosphatases pp2cs snf1related protein kinases snrk2s and diverse sets of proteins regulated by phosphorylation via these kinases including bzip transcription factors such as abainsensitiveabi5.
the larger network of aba signaling factors includes additional kinases and e3 ligases that modify these components to affect their activity and stability.
the abi5binding proteins afps are negative regulators of aba response.
this study shows that the afps interact with specific family members of all components of this pathway and are substrates for snrk2s and pp2cs.
afps also interact with subsets of map kinases mpks and 1433 proteins previously found to regulate activity of the abi5related clade of transcription factors.
residues predicted to be phosphorylated are conserved between afps but are located within regions predicted to be unstructured.
aba promotes phosphorylation of afp2 but conditions that prevent phosphorylation of afp2 result in decreased stability a shift in localization toward dispersed foci and reduced effectiveness for inhibiting aba response at germination.
thus afp2 appears to be an important hub in the aba core signaling pathway."
"understanding the pulmonary adaptive immune system of pigs is important as respiratory pathogens present a major challenge for swine producers and pigs are increasingly used to model human pulmonary diseases.
singlecell rna sequencing scrnaseq has accelerated the characterization of cellular phenotypes in the pig respiratory tract under both healthy and diseased conditions.
however combining scrnaseq with recovery of paired t cell receptor tcr α and β chains as well as b cell receptor bcr heavy and light chains to interrogate their repertoires has not to our knowledge been demonstrated for pigs.
here we developed primers to enrich porcine tcr α and β chains along with bcr κ and β light chains and igm iga and igg heavy chains that are compatible with the 10x genomics vdj sequencing protocol.
using these pigspecific assays we sequenced the t and b cell receptors of cryopreserved lung cells from cd1dexpressing and deficient pigs after one or two infections with influenza a virus iav to examine whether natural killer t nkt cells alter pulmonary tcr and bcr repertoire selection.
we also performed paired singlecell rna and receptor sequencing of facssorted t cells longitudinally sampled from the lungs of iavvaccinated and infected pigs to track clonal expansion in response to iav exposure.
all pigs presented highly diverse repertoires.
pigs reexposed to influenza antigens from either vaccination or infection exhibited higher numbers of expanded cd4 and cd8 t cell clonotypes with activated phenotypes suggesting potential iav reactive t cell populations.
our results demonstrate the utility of high throughput singlecell tcr and bcr sequencing in pigs."
" is a major opportunistic human pathogen which causes both noninvasive and invasive disease.
the  type b hib vaccine has led to a significant reduction of invasive hib disease but offers no protection against colonisation or disease by nontypeables nt or nonb serotypes and  remains a public health burden worldwide with increasing reports of multidrug resistance mdr.
despite this there is no comprehensive understanding of the species global population structure.
here we wholegenome sequenced 4000 isolates of"
"in recent years we have seen a significant increase in our understanding of the mechanisms of development regeneration and healing of the respiratory system.
however most of these studies have been limited by their focus on mammalian systems.
here we aimed to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms that are active during lung growth and tissue repair in amphibians specifically xenopus tropicalis .
first we analyzed the stem cell composition and signaling pathways that are active in epithelial and mesenchymal cells during lung growth.
then we established a protocol for lung injury to assess the types of stem cells underlying tissue repair.
in mammals sftpc at2 cells are alveolar stem cells that can differentiate to krt8 cells during lung homeostasis and postinjury repair.
in this study we identified sftpc cells and krt8 cells along with the activity of key developmental signaling pathways hippo and wnt during lung maturation at postmetamorphosis stages.
we then established a protocol for lung injury using chemically induced injury with bleomycin which damages the lung through oxidative stress.
the results show an elevation in collagen postinjury indicating bleomycin’s effect in causing lung fibrosis.
froglets survived 42 days postinjury with a continuous decrease in fibrosis.
to explore this effect we analyzed the distribution of lung stem cells sox9 protein levels and sftp gene expression were downregulated at the alveoli 42 days postinjury.
the decrease in stem cell marker expression 42 days postinjury suggests they are differentiating as part of the healing process.
nevertheless we could still detect them after a few weeks of healing.
these results suggest that  has a regenerative capacity for lung tissue repair and that the same signaling pathways and stem cells are active in both amphibians and mammalian lungs during lung growth regeneration and healing.
these findings show for the first time the physiological similarities between the anuran and the mammalian lung during growth and tissue repair processes suggesting"
"there is high demand for microbial pigments as promising alternative for synthetic pigments basically for safety and economic reasons.
this study aimed at the optimization of yellowishorange pigment production by exiguobacterium aurantiacum using agrowaste extract as growth substrate.
air samples were collected using depositional method.
pure cultures of pigment producing bacteria were isolated by subsequent culturing on fresh nutrient agar medium and the potent isolate was identified using malditof technique.
culture conditions were screened using plackettburman design and the most three significant variables were optimized by response surface methodology.
fermentation was conducted in 150 ml agrowaste decoctions from which tomato waste extract was selected because of higher optical density of the culture compared to other agrowaste extracts.
pigment was extracted by solvent extraction method and the best solvent was selected based on its ability to dissolve the culture suspension.
the pigment was characterized using spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques.
culture agitation rate initial medium ph and concentration of yeast extract were identified as the most significant p 0.0001 variables affecting pigment production.
at optimized conditions 0.96 gl of pigment was extracted from 4.73 gl of culture biomass and the extracted pigment under optimized conditions was 1.6 times higher than the pigment extracted under unoptimized conditions.
the spectroscopic and chromatographic analyses demonstrated the presence of different functional groups and carotenoids were identified as parts of the molecule responsible for the yellowishorange pigmentation of the extract.
this study demonstrated the potential for optimization of pigment production by bacteria using agrowaste extract as substrate.
hence the current findings strongly encourage for further study at a largescale level for industrial production."
"giant viruses of protists are a diverse and likely ubiquitous group of organisms.
here we describe jyvaskylavirus the first giant virus isolated from finland.
this clade b marseillevirus was found in  from a composting soil sample in jyväskylä central finland.
its genome shares similarities with other marseilleviruses including conserved nucleocytoviricota genes histonelike genes and three unique orfans.
helium ion microscopy and electron microscopy of infected cells unraveled stages of the jyvaskylavirus lifecycle such as single virions attached to the cell membrane likely triggering endocytosis and virusrich vesicle formation within the cytoplasm.
we also reconstructed the jyvaskylavirus particle to 6.3 å resolution using cryoem.
the 2500 å diameter virion displays structural similarities to other  giant viruses.
the capsid comprises of 9240 copies of the major capsid protein orf184 which possesses a double jellyroll fold arranged in trimers forming pseudohexameric capsomers.
below the capsid shell the internal membrane vesicle encloses the genome.
through crossstructural and sequence comparisons with other  using aibased software in model building and prediction we elucidated orf142 as the penton protein which plugs the twelve vertices of the capsid.
five additional orfs were identified with models predicted and fitted into densities that either cap the capsomers externally or stabilize them internally.
the isolation of jyvaskylavirus along with other viruslike particles not only suggests that these viruses may be widespread in the boreal environment but also provide insights extendable to other marseilleviruses addressing the previously lacking structural data on minor capsid proteins."
"tripartite motif trim family proteins have diverse roles across a broad variety of cellular functions which are largely presumed to depend on their ubiquitin e3 ligase activity conferred by a ring domain.
however recent reports have shown that some trims lack detectable ubiquitination activity in isolation despite containing a ring domain.
here we present parallel in cellulo in vitro and in silico structurefunction analyses of the ubiquitin e3 ligase activity and ring domain structural characteristics of whole trim protein family.
indepth followup studies of this comprehensive dataset reveals a number of pseudoligases whose ring domains have structurally diverged at either the homodimerisation or e2ubiquitin interfaces thereby disrupting their ability to catalyse ubiquitin transfer.
together these data raise intriguing open questions regarding the unknown trim functions in physiology and disease."
"gene regulatory networks grns play a crucial role in the control of cellular functions.
numerous methods have been developed to infer grns from gene expression data including mechanismbased approaches informationbased approaches and more recent deep learning techniques the last of which often overlooks the underlying gene expression mechanisms.
in this work we introduce trendy a novel grn inference method that integrates transformer models to enhance the mechanismbased wendy approach.
through testing on both simulated and experimental datasets trendy demonstrates superior performance compared to existing methods.
furthermore we apply this transformerbased approach to three additional inference methods showcasing its broad potential to enhance grn inference."
"systemic lupus erythematosus sle is an autoimmune disease in which the production of pathogenic autoantibodies depends on t follicular helper tfh cells.
this study was designed to investigate the mechanisms by which inhibition of glycolysis with 2deoxydglucose 2dg reduces the expansion of tfh cells and the associated autoantibody production in lupusprone mice.
integrated cellular transcriptomic epigenetic and metabolic analyses showed that 2dg reversed the enhanced cell expansion and effector functions as well as mitochondrial and lysosomal defects in lupus tfh cells which include an increased chaperonemediated autophagy induced by tlr7 activation.
importantly adoptive transfer of 2dgreprogrammed tfh cells protected lupusprone mice from disease progression.
orthologs of genes responsive to 2dg in murine lupus tfh cells were overexpressed in the tfh cells of sle patients suggesting a therapeutic potential of targeting glycolysis to eliminate aberrant tfh cells and curb the production of autoantibodies inducing tissue damage."
"this integrative literature review analyzes the corpus of biology education research published in the main biology education journals of major professional societies.
the goal of this analysis is to determine which approaches including groups of focus research methods and settingsperspectives from social science fields i.e.
psychology sociology and anthropology are utilized in published peerreviewed biology education research relating to diversity equity and inclusion dei.
scoping how social science approaches are used in this area is important to understanding whether biology education research could benefit from complementary approaches that might advance praxis.
this analysis found that research informing the biology education community draws heavily from psychological perspectives that are overwhelmingly not disaggregated 78 of articles identifying a group used a lumped together one are by far more quantitative 58 used survey 26 grades 20 school data than qualitative 17 used interview 10 observation and did not 72 adopt structural approaches.
the addition of missing contributions from social science is critical to advancing interventions to broaden stem participation given that merging paradigms can offer more robust multilevel explanations for observed phenomena.
this has important implications for education biology education biology education research social science and research in related stem fields."
"purpose highthroughput sequencing has revolutionized genetic disorder diagnosis but variant pathogenicity interpretation is still challenging.
even though the human genome variation society hgvs provides recommendations for variant nomenclature  discrepancies in annotation remain a significant hurdle.
methods this study evaluated the annotation concordance between three toolsannovar snpeff and variant effect predictor vepusing 164549 twostar variants from clinvar.
the analysis used hgvs nomenclature stringmatch comparisons to assess annotation consistency from each tool corresponding coding impacts and associated acmg criteria inferred from the annotations.
results the analysis revealed variable concordance rates with 58.52 agreement for hgvsc 84.04 for hgvsp and 85.58 for the coding impact.
snpeff showed the highest match for hgvsc 0.988 while vep bettered for hgvsp 0.977. the substantial discrepancies were noted in the lossoffunction lof category.
incorrect pvs1 interpretations affected the final pathogenicity and downgraded plp variants annovar 55.9 snpeff 66.5 vep 67.3 risking false negatives of clinically relevant variants in reports.
conclusions these findings highlight the critical challenges in accurately interpreting variant pathogenicity due to discrepancies in annotations.
to enhance the reliability of genetic variant interpretation in clinical practice standardizing transcript sets and systematically crossvalidating results across multiple annotation tools is essential."
 biophysics and computational biology
"antibiotic use is a key driver of antibiotic resistance.
understanding the quantitative association between antibiotic use and resulting resistance is important for predicting future rates of antibiotic resistance and for designing antibiotic stewardship policy.
however the useresistance association is complicated by “spillover” in which one population’s level of antibiotic use affects another population’s level of resistance via the transmission of bacteria between those populations.
spillover is known to have effects at the level of families and hospitals but it is unclear if spillover is relevant at larger scales.
we used mathematical modeling and analysis of observational data to address this question.
first we used dynamical models of antibiotic resistance to predict the effects of spillover.
whereas populations completely isolated from one another do not experience any spillover we found that if even 1 of interactions are between populations then spillover may have large consequences the effect of a change in antibiotic use in one population on antibiotic resistance in that population could be reduced by as much as 50. then we quantified spillover in observational antibiotic use and resistance data from us states and european countries for 3 pathogenantibiotic combinations finding that increased interactions between populations were associated with smaller differences in antibiotic resistance between those populations.
thus spillover may have an important impact at the level of states and countries which has ramifications for predicting the future of antibiotic resistance designing antibiotic resistance stewardship policy and interpreting stewardship interventions."
"cell cycle progression is tightly controlled by the regulated synthesis and degradation of cyclins such as cyclin a and cyclin b which activate cdk1 to trigger mitosis.
mutations affecting cyclin regulation are often linked to tumorigenesis making the study of cyclin mrna regulation critical for identifying new cancer therapies.
in this study we demonstrate via superresolution microscopy that cyclin a and cyclin b mrnas associate with bruno 1 and cup in nurse cells.
depletion of either protein leads to abnormal cyclin a and cyclin b protein expression and a reduction in mrna levels for both cyclins.
we further reveal that both cyclin a and cyclin b mrnas accumulate in pbodies marked by me31b.
interestingly me31b is not involved in regulating cyclin a mrna as no changes in cyclin a mrna levels or repression were observed upon me31b depletion.
however cyclin b mrna shows stagespecific derepression and reduced levels when me31b is absent.
notably the association between cyclin b and cup is strengthened in the absence of me31b indicating that this interaction occurs independently of pbodies.
these results highlight the nuanced mrnaspecific roles of pbody condensates in posttranscriptional regulation challenging the idea of a uniform binary mechanism of mrna repression in pbodies."
"members of the kinesin2 family coordinate with other motors to power diverse physiological processes but the structural mechanisms regulating kinesin2 activity have been unknown.
distinctively kinesin2s canonically function as heterotrimers of two different motor subunits e.g.
kif3a and kif3b and kap3 but the role of heterotrimerization has yet to fully emerge.
here we combine structural cell biological and singlemolecule approaches to dissect kinesin2 regulation as a heterodimer heterotrimer and quaternary complex with a cargo adaptor apc.
we identify a conserved motif in the tail of kinesin2s the betahairpin motif that controls kinesin2 motility by sequestering the motor domains away from their microtubule track using striking molecular mimicry.
our data reveal how kap3 binds via a multipartite interface with kif3a and kif3b and – rather than activating motility directly – provides a platform on which cargo adaptors can engage and occlude the betahairpin motif.
together these data articulate a structural framework for kinesin2 activation coordination with dynein and adaptation for different biological functions."
"combining molecular profiling with imaging techniques has advanced the field of spatial biology offering new insights into complex biological processes.
focusing on diffuse idhmutated lowgrade glioma this study presents a workflow for spatial multiomics integration smint specifically combining spatial transcriptomics and spatial metabolomics.
our workflow incorporates both existing and customdeveloped computational tools to enable cell segmentation and registration of spatial coordinates from both modalities to a common coordinate framework.
during our investigation of cell segmentation strategies we found that nucleionly segmentation while containing only 40 of segmented cell transcripts enables accurate cell type annotation but does not account for multinucleated cells.
our integrative workflow including cellmorphology segmentation identified distinct cellular neighborhoods at the infiltrating edge of gliomas which were enriched in multinucleated and oligodendrocytelineage tumor cells that may drive tumor invasion into the normal cortical layers of the brain."
this research was made possible by grants made to css from the alberta cancer foundation 27246 the canadian cancer society 300072 natural sciences and engineering research council of canada 201804773 the university of calgary and to camf the canadian foundation for innovation cfi john r. evans leaders fund jelf 33617.
"xist a pivotal player in x chromosome inactivation xci has long been perceived as a cisacting long noncoding rna that binds exclusively to the inactive x chromosome xi.
however xists ability to diffuse under select circumstances has also been documented leading us to suspect that xist rna may have targets and functions beyond the xi.
here using female mouse embryonic stem cells es and mouse embryonic fibroblasts mef as models we demonstrate that xist rna indeed can localize beyond the xi.
however its binding is limited to approximately 100 genes in cells undergoing xci es cells and in postxci cells mefs.
the target genes are diverse in function but are unified by their active chromatin status.
xist binds discretely to promoters of target genes in neighborhoods relatively depleted for polycomb marks contrasting with the broad polycombenriched domains reported for human xist rna.
we find that xist binding is associated with downmodulation of autosomal gene expression.
however unlike on the xi xist binding does not lead to full silencing and also does not spread beyond the target gene.
overexpressing xist in transgenic es cells similarly leads to autosomal gene suppression while deleting xists repeat b motif reduces autosomal binding and perturbs autosomal downregulation.
furthermore treating female es cells with the xist inhibitor x1 leads to loss of autosomal suppression.
altogether our findings reveal that xist targets 100 genes beyond the xi identify repeat b as a crucial domain for its intrans function in mice and indicate that autosomal targeting can be disrupted by a small molecule inhibitor."
"the genetic basis of adaptation is a fundamental question in evolutionary genetics.
environmental association analysis eaa and various allele frequency comparisons in genomic environmental association gea have become standard approaches for investigating the genetic basis of adaptation to natural environments.
while these analyses provide insight into local adaptation they have not been widely adopted in breeding or conservation programs.
this may be attributable to the difficulty in identifying the best individuals for transplantationrelocation in conservation efforts or identification of the best parents in breeding programs.
to explore the use of eaa and gea for future breeding programs we used a cereal crop  barley hordeum vulgare l. as our casestudy species due to its wide adaptability to different environments and agroecologies ranging from marginal and low input fields to highproductive farms.
here we use publicly available data to conduct environmental genomic selection egs on 753 landrace barley accessions using a minicore of 31 landrace accessions and a denovo core of 100 as the training populations.
environmental genomic selection is to environmental association analysis eaa what genomic selection is to genomewide association studies gwas.
since local adaptation to the environment is polygenic a wholegenome approach is likely to be more accurate for selecting for environmental adaptation.
here we show distinct genetic background and population differences and how an integrative approach coupling environmental genomic selection and species distribution modelling can help identify key parents for breeding for adaptation to specific environmental variables and geographies to minimize linkage drag."
"invading new territory is a central aspect of the microbial lifestyle allowing microbes to expand to remote locations and pathogens to spread and infect their hosts.
however invading microbes rarely find novel territories uninhabited.
in such a scenario resident microbes can interact with the newcomers and in many cases impede their invasion an effect known as biotic resistance.
accordingly invasions are shaped by the interplay between dispersal and resistance.
however these two factors are difficult to disentangle or manipulate in natural systems making their interplay difficult to understand.
to address this challenge we tracked microbial invasions in the lab over space and time first in a model system of two interacting microbes then in a multistrain system involving a pathogen invading resident communities.
in the presence of biotic resistance we observed three qualitatively different invasion regimes consistent pulsed and pinned where in the third regime strong biotic resistance stalled the invasion entirely despite ongoing invader dispersal.
surprisingly these rich invasion dynamics could be qualitatively predicted with a simple parameterfree framework that ignores individual species interactions even for rather complex communities.
moreover we showed that this simple framework could accurately predict simulated invasions from different mechanistic models indicating its broad applicability.
our work offers a thorough understanding of how biotic resistance impacts invasions and introduces a predictive tool to identify invasionresistant communities."
"with their ability to degrade dietary fibers to liberate otherwise unavailable substrates members of the bacteroidales exert a substantial influence on the microbiome of the lower intestine.
currently our knowledge of how this influence translates to the metabolic interactions that support community structure is limited.
here we applied constraintsbased modeling to chicken cecal communities to investigate metabolic interactions in the presence and absence of bacteroides.
from metagenomic datasets previously generated from 30 chicken ceca we constructed 233 metagenomeassembled genomes.
metabolic modeling of communities built from these genomes generated profiles of short chain fatty acids largely consistent with experimental assays and confirmed the role of b. fragilis as a metabolic hub central to the production of metabolites consumed by other taxa.
in its absence communities undergo significant functional reconfiguration with metabolic roles typically fulfilled by b. fragilis assumed by multiple taxa.
beyond b. fragilis we found escherichia coli and lactobacillus crispatus also mediate influential metabolic roles that vary in the presence or absence of b. fragilis.
compensatory adaptations adopted by the microbiome in the absence of b. fragilis resulted in metabolic profiles previously associated with inflammatory bowel disease in humans including energy deficiency increased lactate production and altered amino acid metabolism.
this work demonstrates the potential of chicken cecal microbiomes to investigate the complex metabolic interactions and key contributions that drive community dynamics."
"nonhuman animal models have demonstrated that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ssris can enhance plasticity within the mature visual cortex and enable recovery from amblyopia.
the aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the ssri citalopram combined with parttime patching of the fellow fixing eye would improve amblyopic eye visual acuity in adult humans.
following a crossover randomized double blind placebocontrolled design preregistration actrn12611000669998 participants completed two 2week blocks of fellow fixing eye patching.
one block combined patching with citalopram 20 mgday and the other with a placebo tablet.
the blocks were separated by a 2week washout period.
the primary outcome was change in amblyopic eye visual acuity.
secondary outcomes included stereoacuity and electrophysiological measures of retinal and cortical function.
seven participants were randomized fewer than our prespecified sample size of 20. there were no statistically significant differences in amblyopic eye visual acuity change between the active mean ± sd change  0.08±0.16 logmar and the placebo mean change  −0.01±0.03 logmar blocks.
no treatment effects were observed for any secondary outcomes.
however 3 of 7 participants experienced a 0.1 logmar or greater improvement in amblyopic eye visual acuity in the active but not the placebo block.
these results from a small sample suggest that largerscale trials of ssri treatment for adult amblyopia may be warranted.
considerations for future trials include drug dose treatment duration and recruitment challenges."
"organonchip ooc devices are an emerging new approach method in both pharmacology and toxicology.
such devices use heterotypic combinations of human cells in a microfabricated device to mimic"
"classical cadherins are ubiquitous calciumdependent adhesive glycoproteins required in junction formation in metazoans.
calcium ions are essential for cadherin biological activity but how they act in synergy is still a matter of controversy.
we investigated by cryoelectron microscopy and cryoelectron tomography a biomimetic system consisting of liposomes decorated with the two first ecadherin extracellular modules previously reported as functionally essential in junction formation.
we showed that ecadherin extracellular modules 1 and 2 are sufficient to form junctions in presence of calcium.
together with the first adhesive contacts we observed the formation of cadherin patches and quasicrystalline structures on the free surface of proteoliposomes suggesting that calcium complexation induces the selfinteraction of the ecadherin extracellular modules 1 and 2 through cis interactions.
we propose that these calciumdependent cadherin nanoplatforms by facilitating the formation frequency of trans interactions most probably favor the formation of junctions.
we also observed a cooperative effect between trans and cis interactions leading to the protein depletion of liposome surfaces.
additionally cryoelectron tomography experiments performed on extracellular ecadherin modules 1 and 2mediated junctions revealed the coexistence of different molecular arrangements previously described from crystallography studies.
thus this study provides a new insight into biophysical mechanisms underlying how calcium binding modulates cadherin adhesive function in showing that ecadherin 1 and 2 modules play a key role through their intrinsic ability to form multiple calciumdependent cis and trans interactions in the formation of cadherin junctions contributing to the dynamics and plasticity of cadherinmediated cell junctions."
"recognition of subtle emotional facial expressions is challenging for some individuals with autism spectrum disorders asd.
training that targets recognition of low intensity emotional expressions may therefore be effective as an intervention to improve socialemotional skills.
this paper reports the results of two randomised controlled experiments looking at the effect of a training methodology designed to increase the recognition of happy emotion in low intensity happy facial expressions.
the first study implements this training with children with autism spectrum disorder asd n  14 and the second study implements this training with adults with asd n  27. the training paradigm used images from a morph sequence that mixed a happy expression with a mixedemotion ‘norm’ expression to create a sequence of varying intensity happy expressions.
participants were asked to say whether or not individual faces from the sequence were happy to measure their happiness detection threshold.
participants that received active training were given biased feedback to shift their detection threshold while participants that received control training were given feedback consistent with their baseline threshold.
there was some statistical evidence that thresholds in the active training group shifted more than in the control group.
this suggests training was successful in increasing the number of expressions that individuals identified as happy.
however there was no evidence that training increased facial expression recognition accuracy as measured by the reading the mind in the eyes task completed after training study 2."
"many interactions in microbial consortia or tissues of multicellular organisms rely on networks of metabolite exchanges.
to predict community function and composition beyond statistical correlations one can use genomescale metabolic models.
however comprehensive model analysis via metabolic pathways is a major challenge because pathway counts grow combinatorially with model size.
here we define minimal pathways that yield compact representations of metabolic network capabilities.
they generalize existing pathway concepts by allowing inhomogeneous constraints and targeted analysis of subnetworks and we show how to enumerate and sample them efficiently via iterative minimization and pathway graphs.
this enables applications such as assessing quantitative gene essentiality in the central metabolism of  predicting metabolite exchanges associated with homeostasis and health in a hostmicrobe model of the human gut and designing butyrateproducing microbial communities.
minimal pathways enable scalable analysis of metabolic subnetworks such as metabolite exchanges in uni and multicellular systems."
"the protein hormone insulin forms a homodimer that must dissociate to bind to its receptor.
understanding the kinetics and mechanism of dissociation is essential for rational design of therapeutic analogs.
in addition to its physiological importance this dissociation process serves as a paradigm for coupled unfolding and unbinding.
based on previous free energy simulations insulin dissociation is thought to involve multiple pathways with comparable free energy barriers.
here we analyze the mechanism of insulin dimer dissociation using a recently developed computational framework for estimating kinetic statistics from shorttrajectory data.
these statistics indicate that the likelihood of dissociation the committor closely tracks the decrease in the number of native and nonnative intermonomer contacts and the increase in the number of water contacts at the dimer interface the transition state with equal likelihood of association and dissociation corresponds to an encounter complex with relatively few native contacts and many nonnative contacts.
we identify four pathways out of the dimer state and quantify their contributions to the rate as well as their exchange by computing reactive fluxes.
we show that both the pathways and their extents of exchange can be understood in terms of rotations around three axes of the dimer structure.
our results provide insights into the kinetics of insulin analogues and more generally how to characterize complex multipathway processes."
"rna is a dynamic biomolecule crucial for cellular regulation with its function largely determined by its folding into complex structures while misfolding can lead to multifaceted biological sequelae.
during the folding process rna traverses through a series of intermediate structural states with each transition occurring at variable rates that collectively influence the time required to reach the functional form.
understanding these folding kinetics is vital for predicting rna behavior and optimizing applications in synthetic biology and drug discovery.
while in silico kinetic rna folding simulators are often computationally intensive and timeconsuming accurate approximations of the folding times can already be very informative to assess the efficiency of the folding process.
in this work we present kinpfn a novel approach that leverages priordata fitted networks to directly model the posterior predictive distribution of rna folding times.
by training on synthetic data representing arbitrary prior folding times kinpfn efficiently approximates the cumulative distribution function of rna folding times in a single forward pass given only a few initial folding time examples.
our method offers a modular extension to existing rna kinetics algorithms promising significant computational speedups orders of magnitude faster while achieving comparable results.
we showcase the effectiveness of kinpfn through extensive evaluations and realworld case studies demonstrating its potential for rna folding kinetics analysis its practical relevance and generalization to other biological data."
"centromeres reside in rapidly evolving repeatrich genomic regions despite their essential function in chromosome segregation.
across organisms centromeres are rich in selfish genetic elements such as transposable elements and satellite dnas that can bias their transmission through meiosis.
however these elements still need to cooperate at some level and contribute to or avoid interfering with centromere function.
to gain insight into the balance between conflict and cooperation at centromeric dna we take advantage of the close evolutionary relationships within the drosophila simulans clade d. simulans d. sechellia and d. mauritiana and their relative d. melanogaster.
using chromatin profiling combined with high resolution fluorescence in situ hybridization on stretched dna we characterize all centromeres across these species.
we discovered dramatic centromere reorganization involving recurrent shifts between retroelements and satellite dnas over short evolutionary timescales.
we also reveal the recent origin 240 kya of telocentric chromosomes in d. sechellia where the x and 4th centromeres now sit on telomerespecific retroelements.
finally the y chromosome centromeres which are the only chromosomes that do not experience female meiosis do not show dynamic cycling between satdna and tes.
the patterns of rapid centromere turnover in these species are consistent with genetic conflicts in the female germline and have implications for centromeric dna function and karyotype evolution.
regardless of the evolutionary forces driving this turnover the rapid reorganization of centromeric sequences over short evolutionary timescales highlights their potential as hotspots for evolutionary innovation."
"rigi like receptors rlrs are a family of cytosolic rna sensors that sense rna virus infection to activate innate immune response.
it is generally believed that different rna viruses are recognized by either rigi or mda5 two important rlr members depending on the nature of pathogenassociated molecular patterns pamps that are generated during rna virus infection.
however it remains elusive which rlr is involved in sensing the pamps of dengue virus denv an important rna virus causing serious human diseases and the molecular basis of the denv pamps is poorly defined.
here we demonstrated that the denv infectioninduced interferon response is dependent upon both rigi and mda5 with rigi playing a predominant role.
next we purified the denv pamps from the denvinfected cells by biochemical approaches and demonstrated that the purified denv pamps are viral fulllength doublestranded rna bearing 5’ppp modifications likely representing the viral replicativeform rna.
finally we confirmed the nature of the denv pamps by reconstituting the viral replicativeform rna from in vitro synthesized denv genomic rna.
in conclusion our work defined the molecular basis of the rlrpamp interactions during denv infection and revealed the previously neglected cooperative contributions by different rlrs in innate immunity against rna viruses."
"population structure provides essential information for developing meaningful conservation plans.
this is especially important in remote places such as oceanic islands where limited population sizes and genetic isolation can make populations more susceptible and selfdependent.
in this study we assess and compare the relatedness population genetics and molecular ecology of two sympatric  species  randall  myers 1983 and  cf.
veron  wallace 1984 around guam using genomewide sequence data ddrad.
we further contrast our findings with the results of a recent study on back reef  cf.
brook 1891 to assess the impact of habitat colony morphology and phylogenetic relatedness on these basic population genetic characteristics and generate testable hypotheses for future studies.
both target species were found to have small effective population sizes low levels of genetic diversity and minimal population structure around guam.
nonetheless  cf.
had significantly higher levels of genetic diversity some population structure as well as more clones close relatives and putative loci under selection.
comparisons with  cf.
indicate a potentially significant impact by habitat on population structure and genetic diversity while colony morphology seems to significantly impact clonality.
this study revealed significant differences in the basic population genetic makeup of two sympatric  species on guam.
our results suggest that colony morphology and habitatecology may have a significant impact on the population genetic makeup in reef corals which could offer valuable insights for future management decisions in the absence of genetic data."
"krabbe disease kd is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by loss–of–function mutations in the galc gene which encodes for the enzyme galactosylceramidase galc.
galc is crucial for myelin metabolism.
functional deficiency of galc leads to toxic accumulation of psychosine dysfunction and death of oligodendrocytes and eventual brain demyelination.
to date 46 clinically–relevant pathogenic galc missense mutations mms have been identified in kd patients.
these mms are present in 70 of kd cases reported over 8 published studies between 1996 – 2019. however the mechanisms by which these mms lead to galc functional deficiency and their correlations with clinical phenotype remain poorly understood.
to address this we generated a galc–knockout human oligodendrocytic cell line mo3.13 galc–ko using crispr–cas9 method to assess galc function and galc secretion.
we evaluated 5 polymorphic and 31 clinically–relevant mm variants mmvs using transient expression assays.
our results showed that 26 mmvs including 10 co–variants with p.i562t reduced galc activity by 92 – 100 compared to wildtype galc wt–galc.
mmvs from infantileonset kd patients produced  2 of wt activity whereas those associated with juvenile– and adult–onset cases retained up to 7 of wt activity.
residual galc activity was correlated with mature lysosomal galc protein levels pearson r  0.93 p0.0001.
many low–activity mmvs did not correspondingly impair galc secretion.
twenty–one of the 26 low–activity mmvs showed a 21 – 100 reduction in sec–galc levels indicating varying degrees of galc mis–trafficking among these variants.
importantly galc activity among mmvs strongly correlates with clinical disease severity based on the age of symptom onset in patients with either homozygous mm pearson r  0.98 p0.0001 n  7 or compound heterozygous pearson r  0.94 p0.0001 n  12 mm–null mutation genotypes.
thus our data suggests that galc activity could serve as a prognostic disease indicator under specific experimental conditions.
we further investigated the impact of pathogenic mmvs on psychosine accumulation a key biomarker for kd.
psychosine levels were 21–fold higher in mock control cells compared to wt–galc transfected cells mock  0.349 pmolmg wt–galc  0.016 pmolmg but negatively correlated with galc activity among pathogenic mmvs pearson r  –0.63 p  0.01 n  15. although psychosine levels were higher in most mmvs associated with infantile–onset kd no significant correlations with clinical onset were detected.
overall our study provides a comprehensive quantitative analysis of the functional deficits and mis–trafficking associated with clinically–relevant galc mmvs enhancing our understanding of the molecular genetics and genotype–phenotype correlations of the galc gene in krabbe disease."
"tumors often evolve to engage numerous strategies to circumvent detection by the immune system.
our group recently discovered elevated neolactoseries glycosphingolipids nsgsl surface levels as a possible immune evasion mechanism of tumors.
we demonstrated a direct disruption of both innate and adaptive antitumor immunity  when expression of nsgsls was upregulated on established target cells.
it remains unclear however whether"
"artificial intelligence aibased drug repurposing is an emerging strategy to identify drug candidates
to treat rare diseases.
however cuttingedge algorithms based on deep learning dl typically dont provide a human understandable explanation supporting their predictions.
this is a problem because it hampers the biologists ability to decide which predictions are the most plausible drug candidates to test in costly lab experiments.
in this study we propose rdexplainer a novel ai drug repurposing method for rare diseases which obtains possible drug candidates together with human understandable explanations.
the method is based on graph neural network gnn technology and explanations were generated as semantic graphs using stateoftheart explainable ai xai.
the model learns features from current background knowledge on the target rare disease structured as a knowledge graph kg which integrates curated facts and their evidence on different biomedical entities such as symptoms drugs genes and ortholog genes.
our experiments demonstrate that our method has excellent performance that is superior to stateof theart models.
we investigated the application of xai on drug repurposing for rare diseases and we prove our method is capable of discovering plausible drug candidates based on testable explanations.
the data and code are publicly available at httpsgithub.compperdomoqrarediseaseexplainer."
"the evolution of sexual secondary characteristics necessitates regulatory factors that confer sexual identity to differentiating tissues and cells.
in  butterflies males exhibit two specialized wing scale types — uviridescent uvi and lanceolate scales — absent in females and likely integral to male courtship behavior.
this study investigates the regulatory mechanisms and singlenucleus transcriptomics underlying these two sexually dimorphic cell types during wing development.
we show that doublesex dsx expression is itself dimorphic and required to repress the uvi cell state in females while unexpectedly uvi activation in males is independent from dsx.
in the melanic marginal band dsx is required in each sex to enforce the presence of lanceolate scales in males and their absence in females.
singlenucleus rnaseq reveals that uviridescent and lanceolate scale cell precursors each show distinctive gene expression profiles at 40 of pupal development with marker genes that include regulators of transcription cell signaling cytoskeletal patterning and chitin secretion.
both malespecific cell types share a low expression of the   transcription factor a key repressor of the uvi fate.
bab chipseq profiling suggests that bab binds the cisregulatory regions of gene markers associated to uvi fate including potential effector genes involved in the regulation of cytoskeletal processes and chitin secretion and loci showing signatures of recent selective sweeps in an uvipolymorphic population.
these findings open new avenues for exploring wing patterning and scale development shedding light on the mechanisms driving the specification of sexspecific cell states and the differentiation of specialized cell ultrastructures."
"tropical milkweed asclepias curassavica serves as a host plant for monarch butterflies danaus plexippus and other insect herbivores that can tolerate the abundant cardiac glycosides that are characteristic of this species.
cardiac glycosides along with additional specialized metabolites also contribute to the ethnobotanical uses of a. curassavica.
to facilitate further research on milkweed metabolism we assembled the 197 mbp genome of a fifthgeneration inbred line of a. curassavica into 619 contigs with an n50 of 10 mbp.
scaffolding resulted in 98 of the assembly being anchored to 11 chromosomes which are mostly colinear with the previously assembled common milkweed a. syriaca genome.
assembly completeness evaluations showed that 98 of the busco gene set is present in the a. curassavica genome assembly.
the transcriptomes of six tissue types young leaves mature leaves stems flowers buds and roots with and without defense elicitation by methyl jasmonate treatment showed both tissuespecific gene expression and induced expression of genes that may be involved in cardiac glycoside biosynthesis.
expression of a cyp87a gene the predicted first gene in the cardiac glycoside biosynthesis pathway was observed only in the stems and roots and was induced by methyl jasmonate.
together this genome sequence and transcriptome analysis provide important resources for further investigation of the ecological and medicinal uses of a. curassavica."
"glioblastoma gbm is an aggressive brain tumor with limited treatment options and a poor prognosis.
tumor treating fields ttf therapy which uses alternating electric fields to disrupt cancer cell division has emerged as a promising noninvasive treatment.
however the development and optimization of ttf systems remain challenging with limited studies detailing the design and practical application of such systems.
in this study we developed a novel ttf prototype focusing on the design and fabrication of key components such as the electrical signal regulation transmission and corresponding therapeutic effects.
we evaluated the system’s efficacy through a series of  and  experiments.
we demonstrated significant inhibition of gbm cell proliferation under varying electric field intensities with stronger fields showing greater efficacy."
"porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus prrsv strongly impacts the pig rearing sector due to its persistence in infected animals.
interestingly although the prrsv family exhibits considerable genome variability with the prrsv1 and prrsv2 subtypes having been finally classified in two different species betaarterivirus suid 1 and 2. both viruses as well as their derivedattenuated vaccine strains persist for months due in part to their ability to delay the appearance of neutralizing antibodies.
thanks to extensive efforts over the past years we have developed the capability to perform indepth analysis of the previously poorly understood porcine inverted lymph node ln.
in this study by comparing the early stages of ln b cell maturation upon prrsv1 infection to those induced upon the acute swine influenza a virus infection we highlighted prrsvspecific mechanisms including the expression of pdl1 in efferent macrophages the induction of extrafollicular plasmocytes and the influx of inflammatory monocytesmacrophages.
studies on prrsv2 infections report observations compatible with our results that thus might be generalized to all prrsvstrains.
moreover these mechanisms can be compared with those used by the human immunodeficiency virus hiv and the murine chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus lcmv to hijack the immune response.
these similarities can be harnessed to develop new strategies to improve the development of more efficient antiprrsv vaccines."
"g proteincoupled receptors gpcrs are membrane proteins representing the largest and most therapeutically targeted receptor class for 30 of currently marketed drugs.
two binding motifs for membrane cholesterol the ‘cholesterol recognition amino acid consensus crac domain and ‘cholesterol consensus motif’ ccm were postulated.
using a simulation of molecular dynamics we demonstrate the binding of membrane cholesterol to noncanonical sites distinct from crac and ccm at muscarinic and opioid receptors.
we identified a binding site common for muscarinic and opioid receptors at tm6 arginine 6.35 being the principal residue.
effects of depletion of membrane cholesterol on the functional responses of these receptors correlated with effects of mutations arginine 6.35 on functional responses.
exploiting cholesterolbinding sites and variations in receptormembrane interactions brings novel pharmacotherapeutic opportunities including tissuespecific targeting for sterolbased modulators."
"tyre and road wear particles trwps are a significant yet often underestimated source of environmental pollution contributing to the accumulation of microplastics and a complex mixture of contaminants in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
despite their prevalence the longterm evolutionary effects of trwps beyond their immediate toxicity remain largely unknown.
in this study we assessed mutagenicity in the nonbiting midge chironomus riparius upon exposure to urban sediment collected from a runoff sedimentation basin.
to assess the extent of mutagenic effects over multiple generations we combined the urban sediment exposure model with shortterm mutation accumulation lines mals and subsequent whole genome sequencing wgs.
our results reveal that the exposure to urban sediment significantly increases mutation rates compared to control groups by 50 independent of concentration 0.5 and 10. to infer potential causal processes we conducted a comparative analysis with known mutational spectra from experiments with other studies.
this comparison showed that the mutation profiles induced by urban sediment clearly clustered with those caused by benzoapyrene bap a known polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon pah.
a comprehensive chemical characterization of the sediment confirmed a considerable impact of road runoff and trafficrelated contamination including pahs of primarily petrogenic origin.
this suggests that pahlike compounds present in urban sediments may play a significant role in the observed mutagenic effects.
our study shows that urban sediments influence mutation rates and alter mutational spectra in exposed organisms potentially compromising genomic stability and shaping evolutionary trajectories.
additionally we show that comparatively analysing mutational spectra may provide valuable insights into mutational processes.
these genetic changes may have profound longterm effects on population dynamics and ecosystem health underscoring the importance of understanding the evolutionary consequences of environmental pollution."
glucose is essential for t cell proliferation and function yet its specific metabolic roles
"proteinenergy malnutrition pem is a severe health condition affecting millions especially in developing regions.
this study investigates the potential of moringa oleifera seeds as a lowcost protein source to address protein energy malnutrition.
moringa oleifera seeds were defatted using solvent and used in formulating diets for peminduced wistar rats.
the study analyzed the seeds phytochemical constituents proximate composition amino acid profiles and bioactive compounds through gas chromatographmass spectroscopy gcms.
20 rats were randomly assigned to four groups acontrol b pem c malnourished rats treated with 15 soya bean baseddiet and d malnourished rats  treated with 15 defatted moringa oleifera seedbased diet.
the results show that defatting increased protein content and reduced antinutritional factors like oxalates saponins and tannins enhancing nutrient bioavailability.
defatted moringa oleifera seedbased diets improved liver and kidney functions lipid profiles and protein digestibility in protein energy malnutritioninduced rats.
additionally the seeds contained essential bioactive compounds with potential antioxidant antimicrobial and antiinflammatory properties.
these findings suggest that moringa oleifera seeds could be a promising alternative protein source for combating protein energy malnutrition"
"gastrointestinal gi b cells and plasma cells pcs critical to mucosal homeostasis play an important role in the host response to hiv1 infection.
here high resolution mapping of human b cells and pcs from colon and ileum during both viremic and suppressed hiv1 infection identified a significant reduction in germinal center gc b cells and follicular dendritic cells fdcs during hiv1 viremia.
further iga pcs the major cellular output of intestinal gcs were significantly reduced during viremic hiv1 infection.
pcassociated transcriptional perturbations including type i interferon signaling persisted in antiretroviral therapy art treated individuals suggesting ongoing disruption of the intestinal immune milieu during art.
gi humoral immune perturbations associated with changes in intestinal microbiome composition and systemic inflammation.
herein we highlight a key immune defect in the gi mucosa due to hiv1 viremia with major implications."
"we introduce ledna a versatile educational toolkit designed for teaching fundamental genetics and crisprcas gene editing principles in diverse settings regardless of existing infrastructure.
fabricated using lasercutting techniques ledna is an opensource resource suitable for students across educational levels from high school to graduate studies.
given the transformative potential of crispr technology in various fields including medicine and agriculture a widespread understanding of its principles is essential for informed public discourse and acceptance.
by providing a readily accessible and affordable tool ledna aims to democratize genetics and crispr education globally fostering a more informed and engaged community."
"introduction herpes simplex virus 1 hsv1 infection alters critical markers of alzheimers disease ad in neurons.
one key marker of ad is the hyperphosphorylation of tau accompanied by altered levels of tau isoforms.
however an imbalance in these tau splice variants specifically resulting from altered 3r to 4r mapt splicing of exon 10 has yet to be directly associated with hsv1 infection
methods to this end we infected 2d and 3d human neural models with hsv1 and monitored mapt splicing and tau phosphorylation.
further we transduced shsy5yneurons with hsv1 icp27 which alters rna splicing to analyze if icp27 alone is sufficient to induce altered mapt exon 10 splicing.
results we show that hsv1 infection induces altered splicing of mapt exon 10 increasing 4rtau protein levels tau hyperphosphorylation and tau oligomerization.
discussion our experiments reveal a novel link between hsv1 infection and the development of cytopathic phenotypes linked with ad progression."
"parb is long established chromosome segregation protein in bacteria.
due to the recently demonstrated ctpase activity of parb formation of its nucleoprotein complexes was unrevealed.
parb homodimers bound to ctp are loaded onto dna at pars sites where they recruit condensin smc thereby facilitating chromosome organization and segregation.
whether smc modulates parb complexes has remained unknown.
here we generated streptomyces venezuelae strains producing parbhalotag in the presence or absence of smc and used singlecell timelapse fluorescence microscopy single molecule tracking and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching analysis to explore parb dynamics.
additionally we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation to examine parb interactions with dna in the presence or absence of smc.
we reveal that smc modulates parb complex stability on dna.
we find that the absence of smc results in faster parb complex disassembly and promotes nonspecific dna binding.
additionally we show that smc reduces parb ctpase activity in vitro.
taken together our data provide evidence of smc positive feedback on the parb nucleoprotein complex offering new insight into the nature of parb complex regulation."
"earlylife is a critical period for neurodevelopment and establishment of gut microbiota which are highly susceptible to antibiotic exposure.
here we aimed to investigate association between gut microbiota and metabolites with neurodevelopment and neuroregeneration in earlylife after antibiotic exposure.
to induce microbial dysbiosis in offspring a broadspectrum antibiotic cocktail was administered to mice dams.
the prefrontal lobe spinal cord tissues and gut sample of offspring were collected at different time with or without spinal cord crush injury.
16s rrna sequencing and metabolomics were performed to analyze the gut microbiota and metabolites.
ng2 glia were cultured and treated by mitochondrial fusion and fission compounds and metabolites.
maternal antibiotic exposure significantly affected neuronal maturation ng2 glia proliferation prefrontal cortex myelination and injured spinal cord neuroregeneration of offspring.
mice in antibiotic exposure group exhibited disruption of gut microbiota and metabolites along with lower ace chao and shannon indexes higher relative abundance of enterobacter and escherichiashigella lower lactobacillus and streptococcus genus and downregulated cycloargglyaspdpheval ampicilloyl dg80i19000 petasinine and 6hydroxymelatonin glucuronide.
these metabolites were enriched in alphalinolenic acid metabolism phenylalanine tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis linoleic acid metabolism.
6hydroxymelatonin glucuronide pc20300 pc20200 ameltolide dg80i19000 inproquone and chorismate were the cores of networks between gut microbiota and metabolites and negatively associated with neurodevelopment and neuroregeneration.
additionally gut microbiota metabolites promoted ng2 glia differentiation partly through reversing the effects of mitochondrial fusionfission compounds.
totally antibiotic exposure in earlylife changed the composition abundance and metabolites of gut microbiota in offspring which was associated with neurodevelopment and neuroregeneration."
"aim the changing frequency and intensity of climatic extremes due to climate change can have sudden and adverse impacts on the distribution of species.
while species distribution modelling is a vital tool in ecological applications current approaches fail to fully capture the distribution of climatic extremes particularly of rare events with the most disruptive potential.
especially at the edges of species ranges where conditions are already less favourable predictions might be inaccurate when these extremes are not well represented.
location europe.
taxon tree species.
methods we present a novel approach to integrate extreme events into species distribution models based on the generalised extreme value gev distribution.
this distribution following from the extreme value theory has been established as a valuable tool in analysing climatic extremes both in an ecological context and beyond.
the approach relying on the gev distribution is broadly applicable readily transferable across species and relies on widely available data.
we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach for 28 european tree species illustrating its superior ability to fully capture the distribution of climatic extremes compared to stateoftheart methods.
results we found that incorporating parameters on climatic extremes derived from the gev distribution increased model performance aicmodel and characterized range edges more accurately aucedge compared to competing approaches.
however general auc values were only marginally increased across the species and study period analysed.
overall the gev model predicted a narrower niche for the species included in this study.
main conclusions incorporating climatic extremes can impact spatial predictions of species distribution models especially at range margins.
we found that using the gev distribution to characterise extreme variables in sdms yields the best performance at these distribution edges.
given the importance of range edges for species conservation a detailed inclusion of extremes in sdms employed for those applications will help ensure robust conclusions."
"selfassembly a fundamental property of living matter drives the interconnected cellular organization of tissues.
synthetic cell models have been developed as bionic materials to mimic inherent cellular features such as selfassembly.
here we leverage coassembly of synthetic and natural cells to create hybrid living 3d cancer cultures.
we screened synthetic cell models including giant unilamellar vesicles coacervates microdroplet emulsions proteinosomes and colloidosomes for their ability to form hybrid tumoroids.
our results identify the balance of inter and extracellular adhesion and synthetic cell surface tension as key material properties driving successful coassembly of hybrids.
we further demonstrate that these synthetic cells can establish artificial tumor immune microenvironments arttimes mimicking immunogenic signals within tumoroids.
using the arttime approach we identify cosignaling mechanisms between pd1 and cd2 as a driver in immune evasion of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
our findings demonstrate the 3d bottomup selfassembly of hybrid cancer microenvironments to replace immune components with defined bionic materials pushing the boundaries to functionally integrating living and nonliving matter."
"pigs are crucial sources of meat and protein valuable animal models and potential donors for xenotransplantation.
however the existing reference genome for pigs is incomplete with thousands of segments and missing centromeres and telomeres which limits our understanding of the important traits in these genomic regions.
to address this issue we present a near complete genome assembly for the jinhua pig jht2t constructed using pacbio hifi and ont long reads.
this assembly includes all 18 autosomes and the x and y sex chromosomes with only six gaps.
it features annotations of 46.90 repetitive sequences 35 telomeres 17 centromeres and 23924 highconfident genes.
compared to the sscrofa11.1 jht2t closes nearly all gaps extends sequences by 177 mb predicts more intact telomeres and centromeres and gains 799 more genes and loses 114 genes.
moreover it enhances the mapping rate for both western and chinese local pigs outperforming sscrofa11.1 as a reference genome.
additionally this comprehensive genome assembly will facilitate largescale variant detection and enable the exploration of genes associated with pig domestication such as gpam cyp2c18 ly9 itln2 and chia.
our findings represent a significant advancement in pig genomics providing a robust resource that enhances genetic research breeding programs and biomedical applications."
"chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen with a unique developmental cycle.
it differentiates between two functional and morphological forms elementary body eb and reticulate body rb.
the signals that trigger differentiation from one form to the other are unknown.
ebs and rbs have distinctive characteristics that distinguish them including their size infectivity proteome and transcriptome.
intriguingly they also differ in their overall redox status as ebs are oxidized and rbs are reduced.
we hypothesize that alterations in redox may serve as a trigger for secondary differentiation.
to test this we examined the function of the primary antioxidant enzyme alkyl hydroperoxide reductase subunit c ahpc a wellknown member of the peroxiredoxins family in chlamydial growth and development.
based on our hypothesis we predicted that altering the expression of ahpc would modulate chlamydial redox status and trigger earlier or delayed secondary differentiation.
to test this we created ahpc overexpression and knockdown strains.
during ahpc knockdown ros levels were elevated and the bacteria were sensitive to a broad set of peroxide stresses.
interestingly we observed increased expression of ebassociated genes and concurrent higher production of ebs at an earlier time in the developmental cycle indicating earlier secondary differentiation occurs under elevated oxidation conditions.
in contrast overexpression of ahpc created a resistant phenotype against oxidizing agents and delayed secondary differentiation.
together these results indicate that redox potential is a critical factor in developmental cycle progression.
for the first time our study provides a mechanism of chlamydial secondary differentiation dependent on redox status."
"we introduce ledna a versatile educational toolkit designed for teaching fundamental genetics and crisprcas gene editing principles in diverse settings regardless of existing infrastructure.
fabricated using lasercutting techniques ledna is an opensource resource suitable for students across educational levels from high school to graduate studies.
given the transformative potential of crispr technology in various fields including medicine and agriculture a widespread understanding of its principles is essential for informed public discourse and acceptance.
by providing a readily accessible and affordable tool ledna aims to democratize genetics and crispr education globally fostering a more informed and engaged community."
"thirty to seventy percent of proteins in any given genome have no assigned function and have been labeled as the protein unknownme.
this large knowledge gap prevents the biological community from fully leveraging the plethora of genomic data that is now available.
machinelearning approaches are showing some promise in propagating functional knowledge from experimentally characterized proteins to the correct set of isofunctional orthologs.
however they largely fail to predict enzymatic functions unseen in the training set as shown by dissecting the predictions made for 450 enzymes of unknown function from the model bacteria escherichia coli using the deepectransformer platform.
lessons from these failures can help the community develop machinelearning methods that assist domain experts in making testable functional predictions for more members of the uncharacterized proteome."
"identification of biomarkers of earlystage disease typically requires analysis of very large cohorts which can only be reasonably achieved using highthroughput methods.
we have developed and optimised novel methods for whole blood analysis using volumetric absorptive microsampling devices to produce over 3000 protein identifications by lcms on a q exactive hfx orbitrap.
these methods were tested using a set of whole blood samples from lung cancer patients and matching healthy controls finding 455 differentially expressed proteins using a midthroughput method enabling analysis of 18 samples per day.
to increase throughput for larger clinical cohorts a 60sample per day method was tested on a sciex zenotof 7600. the highthroughput method produced 1.5fold fewer protein identifications and a higher overall  cv compared to the midthroughput method.
despite the lower numbers it produced a set of 36 diseaserelevant and discriminatory differentially expressed proteins that using a machine learning model could differentiate between the disease and control samples with an area under the roc curve auc of 88.9 using random forest algorithms.
these data support the use of highthroughput mass spectrometry methods to screen large cohorts for diagnostic biomarkers that can then be followed up with more targeted analyses."
"the origin of eukaryotes remains a central enigma in biology.
ongoing debates agree on the pivotal role of a symbiosis between an alphaproteobacterium and an asgard archaeon.
however the involvement of other bacterial partners as significant donors of genetic material or the role of interactions with viruses remain contentious.
to address these questions we employed advanced phylogenomic approaches and comprehensive datasets spanning the known diversity of cellular life and viruses.
our analysis provided an updated reconstruction of the last eukaryotic common ancestor leca proteome in which we traced the phylogenetic origin of each protein family.
we found compelling evidence for multiple waves of horizontal gene transfer from diverse bacterial and viral donors with some likely preceding the mitochondrial endosymbiosis.
we inferred the proteomes of the potential major donors and their functional contributions to leca.
our findings underscore the contribution of horizontal gene transfers in shaping the proteomes of preleca ancestors and hint to a facilitating role of nucleocytoviricota viruses.
altogether our results suggest ancient eukaryotes originated within complex microbial ecosystems through a succession of symbiotic interactions that left a footprint of horizontally transferred genes."
"mechanisms of wet adhesion have been developed by several aquatic organisms over millions of years of evolutionary processes.
yet the repertoire of synthetic biocompatible wet adhesive materials is still limited.
in most marine bioadhesive proteins 34–dihydroxyphenylalanine dopa plays a significant role in strong interfacial interactions.
the bioadhesive proteins in freshwater organisms are less well understood.
the quagga mussel"
"the authors have withdrawn this manuscript because they intend to revise this version of preprint substantially in response to comments received from the reviewers and other peers on some analytical parts along with the interpretation of corresponding results in order to make a fresh submission to an impacted reputed journal.
therefore the authors do not wish this work to be cited as reference for the project.
if you have any questions please contact the corresponding author."
"bond graphs provide an energybased methodology for modelling complex systems in a hierarchical fashion at the moment the method allows biological system with both chemical and electrical subsystems to be modelled.
herein the bond graph approach is extended to include chemomechanical transduction thus extending the range of biological systems to be modelled.
actin filament polymerisation and force generation is used as an example of chemomechanical transduction and it is shown that the tf transformer bond graph component provides a practical and conceptually simple alternative to the brownian ratchet approach of peskin odell oster  mogilner.
furthermore it is shown that the bond graph approach leads to the same equation as the brownian ratchet approach in the simplest case.
the approach is illustrated by showing that flexibility and nonnormal incidence can be modelled by simply adding additional bond graph components and that compliance leads to nonconvexity of the forcevelocity curve.
energy flows are fundamental to life for this reason the energy based approach is utilised to investigate the power transmission by the actin filament and its corresponding efficiency.
the bond graph model is fitted to experimental data by adjusting model physical parameters."
"common bean phaseolus vulgaris l. is one of the most important pulse crops in ethiopia contributing to income generation and food security.
information on the genetic variability and trait associations of common bean in the sekota district of north western ethiopia is inadequate.
this study was initiated with the objective to assess variability heritability and trait association among 64 common bean genotypes for quantitative traits using 8x8 simple lattice design at aybra main research site 2023 under rain fed conditions.
analysis of variance was performed using sas software and the anova revealed highly significant variations among genotypes for all the traits considered in the study.
the yield ranged from 1633.1 to 3702.10 kg ha"
"the generation of transgenic plants is essential for plant biology research to investigate plant physiology pathogen interactions and gene function.
however producing stable transgenic plants for plants such as soybean is a laborious and timeconsuming process which can impede research progress.
composite plants consisting of wildtype shoots and transgenic roots are an alternative method for generating transgenic plant tissues that can facilitate functional analysis of genesofinterest involved in root development or rootmicrobe interactions.
in this report we introduce a novel set of gatewaycompatible vectors that enable a wide range of molecular biology uses in roots of soybean composite plants.
these vectors incorporate inframe epitope fusions of green fluorescent protein 3xha or miniturboid which can be easily fused to a geneofinterest using the gateway cloning system.
moreover these vectors allow for the identification of transgenic roots using either mcherry fluorescence or the ruby marker.
we demonstrate the functionality of these vectors by expressing subcellular markers in soybean providing evidence of their effectiveness in generating protein fusions in composite soybean plants.
furthermore we show how these vectors can be used for gene function analysis by expressing the bacterial effector avrpphb in composite roots enabling the identification of soybean targets via immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry.
additionally we demonstrate the successful expression of stable miniturboid fusion proteins in composite roots.
overall this new set of vectors is a powerful tool that can be used to assess subcellular localization and perform gene function analyses in soybean roots without the need to generate stable transgenic plants."
"antibiotic resistance is one of the greatest threats against human health and the misuse and overuse of antibiotics is a key factor driving resistance development.
during prolonged antibiotic treatment of chronic infections the antimicrobial pressure facilitates selection of antibiotic resistance mutations.
it has been suggested that using antibiotics in combinations may reduce the emergence of resistance.
furthermore antibiotic tolerant persister cells may be a reservoir for resistance development so targeting persister cells with antipersister drugs could also reduce the emergence of resistance."
"the development of selective ligands to target dna gquadruplexes g4s has been pivotal in revealing their role in transcriptional regulation.
however most of the ligands described to date lack intrag4 selectivity severely limiting their potential for uncovering the biological function of individual g4s across the genome.
to overcome these limitations we developed atena approach to target exact nucleic acid alternative structures.
atena relies on the chemical modification of established g4ligands to enable their conjugation onto a catalytically inactive cas9 protein dcas9 using halotag allowing for the targeting of individual g4s in living cells.
we have systematically screened the length of the peglinkers connecting the g4ligands to the halotag and sgrna sequences to attain optimal g4 engagement both"
"mcl1 a bcl2 family protein is a key regulator of apoptosis and is often overexpressed in cancers such as lung breast pancreatic cervical ovarian cancers leukemia and lymphoma.
its role in inhibiting apoptosis enables tumor cells to evade cell death and contributes to drug resistance.
targeting mcl1 is crucial in inducing apoptosis and overcoming resistance to therapies that target other antiapoptotic proteins making it a prominent target for anticancer drug development across multiple malignancies.
so our study aimed to discover potent antileukemic compounds targeting mcl1.
we began by selecting a diverse set of molecules from the bindingdb database to construct a structurebased pharmacophore model which was subsequently used to virtually screen a library of 407270 compounds from the coconut database.
subsequently we developed an epharmacophore model using the cocrystallized inhibitor amg176 for further screening.
a qsar model was then implemented to estimate the ic50 values of these compounds filtering those with predicted ic50 values below the median.
the top hits were subjected to molecular docking and mmgbsa binding energy calculations against mcl1 leading to the selection of two promising candidates for further admet analysis.
to assess their electronic properties density functional theory dft calculations were conducted which included geometry optimization frontier molecular orbital fmo analysis homolumo gaps and global reactivity descriptors.
these analyses confirmed favourable profiles and reactivity for the chosen compounds.
in addition predictions for physicochemical and admet properties aligned well with the expected bioactivity and safety profiles of the candidates.
molecular dynamics md simulations further validated their strong binding affinity and stability positioning them as potential mcl1 inhibitors.
our comprehensive computational approach highlights these compounds as promising and safe antileukemic agents with future in vivo and in vitro validation recommended for further confirmation."
"regarding to the impact of ancestral sarscov2 immune imprinting on antibody responses to emerging variants to what extent memory b cells elicited by wildtype wt spike can develop neutralizing breadth and potency in immune recalls is a key question.
here we longitudinally tracked b cells recognizing wt spike in two individuals of mrna vaccine from convalescence of breakthrough infection to acute phase of reinfection.
comprehensive characterization of 632 monoclonal antibodies mabs from those b cells reveals that mabs cloned after reinfection have dramatically enhanced neutralizing breadth and potency including 11 mabs that potently neutralize all tested sarscov2 variants from wt to kp.3.
among the 11 mabs 5 mabs are classified into public clonotypes encoded by ighv353 or ighv366 whereas the rest belong to a rarely reported clonotype encoded by ighv374.
notably ighv374 mabs can neutralize sarscov1 with a minimum ic50 of 0.055 μgml.
structural and functional analysis further suggests that ighv374 mabs target a novel epitope on receptorbinding domain and the best mab termed kxd352 is highly resilient to variations on this epitope.
overall this study demonstrates that both public and rare antibody clonotypes primed by prototype mrna vaccine can achieve extraordinary neutralizing breadth and potency in repeated omicron infections."
"evolutionary radiations on oceanic archipelagos roas have long served as models for understanding evolutionary and ecological processes underlying species diversification.
yet diversity patterns emerging from roas have received relatively little attention from biogeographers even though characterizing the effect of key geoenvironmental factors on island clades species distribution could be important for unraveling diversification dynamics.
in this study we conducted a comparative analysis using islandspecific species richness values for approximately one hundred roas across major oceanic archipelagos mostly hawaii canary islands galapagos and fiji and taxa vascular plants invertebrates and vertebrates.
our aim was to determine whether 1 roa species richness patterns scale as a function of key geoenvironmental factors including island area geological age environmental heterogeneity elevation and topographic complexity and interisland isolation and 2 whether the magnitude of the effects of these factors varies across archipelagos and taxa.
our results identified elevation as a key driver of roa species richness patterns on islands supporting existing theoretical and empirical work that highlighted the central role of environmental heterogeneity in driving diversification on oceanic islands.
as importantly we found that the influence of geoenvironmental factors varies across archipelagos and taxa suggesting that unique archipelagic dynamics and biological traits together shape diversification differently.
our findings emphasize the value of applying biogeographical modeling at resolution of individual radiations to improve our understanding of evolutionary processes on oceanic archipelagos."
"lipids represent the most diverse pool of metabolites found in cells facilitating compartmentation signaling and other functions.
dysregulation of lipid metabolism is linked to disease states such as cancer and neurodegeneration.
however limited tools are available for quantifying metabolic fluxes across the lipidome.
to directly measure reaction fluxes encompassing compound lipid homeostasis we applied stable isotope tracing highresolution mass spectrometry and networkbased isotopologue modeling to nonsmall cell lung cancer nsclc models.
compound lipid metabolic flux analysis clmfa enables the concurrent quantitation of fatty acid synthesis elongation headgroup assembly and salvage reactions within virtually any biological system.
here we resolve liver kinase b1 lkb1mediated regulation of sphingolipid recycling in nsclc cells and precisioncut lung slice cultures.
we also demonstrate that widely used tissue culture conditions drive cells to upregulate fatty acid synthase flux to supraphysiological levels.
finally we identify previously uncharacterized isozyme specificity of ceramide synthase inhibitors highlighting the molecular detail revealed by clmfa."
"gene editing and protein tagging are at the heart of modern developmental and cell biology.
the advent of crisprcas9 based methods offers the possibility to develop customized approaches for genomic manipulations in nonclassical experimental models.
here we show that highly efficient somatic knockins of long dna fragments can be achieved in the developing chick neural tube in ovo.
we compare different types of repair matrices and different methods for the delivery of the crisprcas9 machinery and find that an all plasmidbased approach and short arms of homology provide an easy and efficient method to achieve high frequencies of knockin insertions with virtually no background signal.
we use this method to target fluorescent reporters and dynamically monitor the subcellular distribution of endogenously expressed tagged proteins as well as to insert the gal4vp16 transcription factor or the cre recombinase at specific loci to label neural subpopulations in the chick embryonic spinal cord.
finally we show that the method can also be applied to target the epiblast and somitic mesoderm."
"climate change is impacting marine ecosystems in the california current ecosystem cce through physical changes e.g.
an increase in the frequency and intensity of marine heatwaves that manifest biologically at all trophic levels.
we investigated range expansion into the cce and correlations with environment for a group of tropicalsubtropical seabirds.
we assessed changes in the abundance 20022022 of five species from the genus sula cocos bluefooted redfooted masked and nazca boobies using a novel compilation of four data sources atsea surveys n82 observations records from southeast farallon island n600 the california rare birds committee n593 and ebird a citizen science mobile application n 20529 and looked for relationships with the environment including broad temporal and spatial scale dynamics el niño southern oscillation local conditions where the bird was reported and potential source conditions from baja california sur and the gulf of california.
all five species increased in abundance and all with the exception of bluefooted exhibited a northward range expansion by as much as 6.8 degrees latitude and increased range area of between 2351013 within the cce.
there was increased abundance during warmer conditions el niño and warm sst for cocos redfooted masked and nazca boobies and all species increased by 6923015 after the extreme marine heatwaves that began in late 2013. our results document a tropical shift in seabirds of the cce which may present future challenges to resident species.
as marine heatwaves are projected to increase in frequency and intensity in addition to longterm warming we hypothesize that these species will continue to expand their range northward in the cce."
"shifts in life history traits such as timing of reproduction can help mediate population declines following perturbations and early reproduction should be favoured when adult survival is impacted more than juvenile survival.
in tasmanian devils following the emergence of a fatal transmissible cancer females started to breed precocially i.e.
at age one instead of typically age two and the same time as populations started to decline following disease emergence.
here we focus on a diseased site freycinet peninsula tasmania australia with 18 years of continuous markrecapture data to test 1 whether rates of precocial breeding in females continued to increase after the initial rise after the emergence of the disease 2 whether there was a relationship between body size and breeding success for either oneyearolds or adult females i.e.
at least twoyearsold and 3 whether there was inbreeding depression in breeding success for either age category.
we show that rates of precocial breeding did not continue to rise and that the proportion of precocially breeding females has plateaued at around 50. we also show that there was no effect of body size on the probability of breeding for either oneyearold or for adult females.
finally we show that there was no evidence for inbreeding depression in breeding success for either age class.
we discuss possible constraints that may have inhibited further rise in rates of precocial breeding in the context of limitations to growth in the offspring of precocially breeding and therefore smaller females."
"background
mendelian randomization mr is an important tool for identifying potential biomarkers and drug targets.
colocalization analysis is crucial for validating mr findings and guarding against potential confounding due to linkage disequilibrium.
we aim to systematically benchmark the performance of four bayesian colocalization methods in validating mrbased target discoveries from circulating proteins for cardiometabolic diseases.
results
we conducted mr analyses to assess the associations between circulating levels of 1535 proteins and five cardiometabolic traits followed by colocalization analyses using coloc colocsusie pwcoco and sharepro.
all methods demonstrated wellcontrolled false discoveries in the colocalization analysis of 611 pairs of circulating proteins and cardiometabolic traits with a nominal pvalue  0.9 in mr. sharepro demonstrated the highest frequency in supporting 160 79.6 of the 201 bonferronisignificant proteintrait associations identified by mr compared to coloc supporting 40.3 of these associations colocsusie 46.8 and pwcoco 45.8 and was robust to varying prior colocalization probabilities.
moreover proteintrait associations identified by mr and supported by sharepro were more likely to agree with significant genelevel associations based on rare variants detected in exomewide association studies and implicate known drug targets for cardiometabolic diseases.
eight proteintrait associations were exclusively supported by sharepro and did not demonstrate a high risk of horizontal pleiotropy suggesting potential cardiometabolic biomarkers or drug targets such as hsf1 and havcr2.
conclusions
sharepro most often supports highconfidence associations identified through mr for cardiometabolic diseases.
combining multiple lines of evidence using different methods may substantially increase the yield of biomarker and drug target discovery programs."
"temporally variable environments in natural populations generate fluctuations in both the fitness of mutant alleles and population size.
the theory of storage effect predicted that balanced polymorphism emerges if a population is subdivided into two parts that are respectively exposed to and protected from the selective effect of fluctuating environment.
recently adding cyclic fluctuation in population size to the model of storage effect was found to generate a novel force of positive selection on fitnessamplifying mutants that are eventually maintained in oscillatory polymorphism or fixed in the population.
the latter particularly has an effect of amplifying population size oscillation.
to further understand these ecoevolutionary dynamics and elucidate their generality in natural populations this study built more realistic models that assume randomly not cyclically fluctuating selection and common demographic features including heterogeneous ecological patches or an age structure with overlapping generations.
mathematical analysis revealed that this novel evolutionary force is generated when the size of the subpopulation subject to weak selection does not covary with the rest of the population.
simulations showed that this ‘noncovarying storage effect’ is robust to various perturbations in the model.
multilocus simulations revealed that oscillatory polymorphism at many loci can be simultaneously maintained and that positive feedback between demography and selection can accelerate the sequential fixations of fluctuationamplifying mutations and thus lead to a drastic amplification of population size fluctuation.
these results suggest that the noncovarying storage effect is a potentially prevalent evolutionary force in nature for maintaining genetic variation and causing large demographic fluctuations."
"the integrated stress response isr is a core pathway for maintaining cellular proteostasis and a key regulator of translation in processes beyond the cellular response to stress.
for example the isr regulates developmental axonogenesis learning and memory and synaptic plasticity in the brain.
one barrier to uncovering isr roles in health and disease is the challenge of monitoring its activity.
the transient nature of regulatory phosphorylation events and lack of transgenic isr reporter mouse lines make visually capturing the molecular hallmarks of isr activation in specific cell types especially difficult.
we recently developed the spotlight selective phosphoeif2alpha open reading frame tracking light reporter which uniquely provides a readout of the functional state of protein synthesis initiation dynamics that are regulated by the isr.
here we report the generation of a transgenic mouse line with credependent expression of spotlight.
this resource enables selective visualization of isrregulated functional activity across genetically defined cell populations bodywide.
using a panneuronal cre line nestincre we demonstrate the reporters performance and applications for cellspecific discovery live tissue assessments and quantitative comparisons across broad physical space.
we also specifically investigated the extent to which the property of steadystate basal isr activation recently described in dorsal striatal cholinergic interneurons extends to other classes of cholinergic neurons and provide a cnswide atlas of spotlight activity in these cells.
the diospotlight mouse enables a wide range of studies in all organ systems and functional monitoring opportunities not previously accessible."
"we and others demonstrated that perm1 is a positive regulator of mitochondrial bioenergetics in the heart.
however discrepant results have emerged with regard to whether perm1 lossoffunction affect cardiac contractility.
in order to exclude the possibility that the reported negative results can be due to insufficient power of statistical test we conducted a more robust echocardiography echo analysis by increasing the sample size.
we used ko and their respective wildtype wt littermates which were destined to tissue harvest.
this yielded 84 wt mice and 88 ko mice.
we analyzed echoderived parameters of left ventricular lv systolic function.
at the end of the study ejection fraction ef was 65.43 ± 7.13 in wt vs. 53.98 ± 8.80 in pko yielding p  0.00000000000000004. other parameters which reached statistically significant difference between wt and ko at p  0.05 included lv fractional shortening fs lv diastolic and systolic diameters lv anterior and posterior systolic wall thickness lv posterior wall systolic thickening stroke volume and cardiac output co. retrospectively a p value  0.05 was consistently achieved in assessment of ef only after average n per group reached 13. larger minimal n per group were required for other parameters.
of interest in both groups there were no correlation between ef and co. at the same time in both groups ef strongly inversely correlated with lv diastolic diameter.
this led us to a speculation that low ef may be in part compensated by an increased lv circumference for the purpose of maintaining invariant co. indeed the intergroup difference in co 6 was much smaller than the intergroup difference in ef 18. we conclude that perm1 does regulate cardiac mechanics.
changes caused by constitutive ko can be conceptualized as reduced contractility partially compensated by increased lv circumference.
this study underscores the importance of sufficiently large sample size for detecting significant differences in echo data."
"the persistence of human immunodeficiency virus hiv within viral reservoirs poses significant challenges to eradication efforts.
epigenetic alterations including dna methylation are potential factors influencing hiv latency and persistence.
this study details the development and application of techniques to assess cpg methylation in the promoter regions of the"
"a unique characteristic of the food web along the western antarctic peninsula wap one of the fastest warming regions in the world is that the avian tertiary predators seasonally rely on avian secondary predators for their subsistence.
we conducted a scoping review to 1. provide a summary of research on antarctic avian predatorprey relationships 2. investigate potential avian predatorprey relationships and trends with the environment and 3. highlight research gaps and provide recommendations for future research.
we searched web of science and google scholar for publications in english during any years.
for our first aim we searched using the terms predatorprey dynamics and antarctica.
we excluded results that did not include both avian predators and prey which resulted in eight publications from around the southern ocean and one along the wap.
for our second aim we searched using the terms of each species common and scientific names gentoo penguin pygoscelis papua adelie penguin p. adeliae chinstrap penguin p. antarcticus southern giant petrel macronectes giganteus south polar skua stercorarius maccormicki brown skua s. antarcticus and population and antarctic peninsula.
we refined our results n59 to publications with data on at least one prey and one predator avian species of all papers found in web of science and the first 100 records of google scholar.
we selected five locations that had data spanning over 10 years and that spread across the northern wap.
we compared predatorprey species trends across time along with sea surface and air temperature.
we found that predatorprey dynamics between avian secondary and tertiary predators have had limited investigations in antarctica.
along the wap the relationship between different penguin species and avian tertiary predators are highly variable and many population trends are decoupled from local temperature change.
we include recommendations for future data collection and research on these interactions."
"functional defects resulting from deleterious mutations can often be restored during evolution by compensatory mutations elsewhere in the genome.
importantly this process can generate the genetic diversity seen in networks regulating the same biological function in different species.
how the options for compensatory evolution depend on the molecular interactions underlying these functions is currently unclear.
in this study we investigate how gene deletions compensating for a defect in the polarity pathway of saccharomyces cerevisiae impact the fitness landscape.
using a transposon mutagenesis screen we demonstrate that gene fitness has changed on a genomewide scale in the compensated strain.
an analysis of the functional associations between the affected genes reveals that compensation impacts cellular processes that have no clear connection to cell polarity.
moreover genes belonging to the same process tend to show the same direction of gene fitness change indicating that compensation rewires the fitness contribution of cellular processes rather than of individual genes.
in conclusion our results strongly suggest that functional overlap between modules and the interconnectedness of the molecular interaction network play major roles in mediating compensatory evolution."
"βadrenergic blockers βblockers are extensively utilized in the treatment of various cardiovascular conditions.
however their direct effects on insulin secretion from pancreatic βcells remain largely unexplored.
this study investigates the impact of βblockers on insulin secretion utilizing min6k8 clonal βcells and mouse islets in vitro.
various nonselective and β1selective βblockers were found to amplify glucose and glimepirideinduced insulin secretion 1.52 fold.
surprisingly some of the βblockers propranolol and bisoprolol were found to increase camp production 510 fold via adenylyl cyclase the effects being dependent on α2adrenoceptors which suggests crossreactivity of these βblockers and their receptors.
propranololstimulated insulin secretion involves a novel signaling pathway mediated by protein kinase a pka ryanodine receptor 2 ryr2 and transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily m member 5 trpm5.
initially camp activates pka and triggers ryr2 phosphorylation and extracellular ca influx leading to cainduced ca release cicr.
subsequently cicr activates trpm5 resulting in augmented extracellular ca influx through the ltype voltagedependent ca"
" obesity causes metabolic dysregulation and contributes to various diseases with autophagy playing a pivotal role in this process.
autophagy a cellular recycling mechanism is influenced by factors beyond obesity like caloric restriction cr and cr combined with exercise crex which modulate autophagy in obesity management.
however the regulation of autophagy in skeletal muscle under conditions of obesity cr and crex remains poorly understood."
"two new biomechanical challenges faced cetacean lungs compared to their terrestrial ancestors.
first hydrostatic pressures encountered during deep dives are sufficient to cause nearly full lung collapse risking substantial barotrauma during surfacing if air is trapped in the fragile smaller airways.
second rapid ventilation in large cetaceans requires correspondingly high ventilatory flow rates.
in order to investigate how airway geometry evolved in response to these challenges we characterized airway geometry from 12 species of cetaceans that vary in common dive depth and ventilatory behavior and a domestic pig using computed tomography.
after segmenting the major airways we generated centerline networks models for the larger airways and computed geometric parameters for each tree including mean branching angle percent volume fraction and strahler branching diameter and length ratios.
when airway geometry was regressed against ventilatory and diving parameters with phylogenetic least squares neither average branching angle percent volume fraction strahler length ratio or strahler branching ratio significantly varied with common ventilatory mode or common diving depth.
higher strahler diameter ratios were associated with slower ventilation and deeper diving depth suggesting that cetacean lungs have responded to biomechanical pressures primarily with changes in airway diameter.
high strahler diameter ratios lungs in deeper diving species may help to facilitate more complete collapse of the delicate terminal airways by providing for a greater incompressible volume for air storage at depth.
on the other hand lungs with low strahler diameter ratios would be better for fast ventilation because the gradual decrease in diameter moving distally should keep peripheral flow resistance low maximizing ventilatory flow rates."
"agerelated cognitive decline is associated with altered physiology of the hippocampus.
while changes in gene expression have been observed in aging brain the regulatory mechanisms underlying these changes remain underexplored.
we generated singlenucleus gene expression chromatin accessibility dna methylation and 3d genome data from 40 human hippocampal tissues spanning adult lifespan.
we observed a striking loss of astrocytes opc and endothelial cells during aging including astrocytes that play a role in regulating synapses.
microglia undergo a dramatic switch from a homeostatic state to a primed inflammatory state through dna methylome and 3d genome reprogramming.
aged cells experience erosion of their 3d genome architecture.
our study identifies ageassociated changes in cell typesstates and gene regulatory features that provide insight into cognitive decline during human aging."
"targeting dna payloads into human hipscs involves multiple timeconsuming inefficient steps that must be repeated for each construct.
here we present straightin dual which enables simultaneous allelespecific singlecopy integration of two dna payloads with 100 efficiency within one week.
notably straightin dual leverages the straightin platform to allow nearscarless cargo integration facilitating the recycling of components for
subsequent cellular modifications.
using straightin dual we investigated how promoter choice and gene syntax influences transgene silencing and demonstrate the impact of these design features on forward programming of hipscs into neurons.
furthermore we designed a grazoprevirinducible synziftr system to complement the widelyused tetracyclineinducible system providing independent tunable and temporally controlled expression of both transcription factors and functional reporters.
the unprecedented efficiency and speed with which straightin dual generates homogenous genetically engineered hipsc
populations represents a major advancement for synthetic biology in stem cell applications and opens opportunities for precision cell engineering."
the epidemiological transition from young to old deaths in highincome countries reduced mortality at all ages but a major role was played by a decline of infant and child mortality from infectious diseases
"cd4 t helper cells th cells play a vital role in coordinating and amplifying the immune response to specific pathogens.
they constitutively produce different kinds of extracellular vesicles evs which mediate cellto cell communication and play diverse roles in immune regulation and inflammatory processes.
here we provide a resource documenting the composition of activated th cell evs and demonstrating their ability to instigate proinflammatory response in antigenpresenting cells apcs.
evs were characterized by lipidomics proteomics and nanofcm.
the activated th cells derived evs actevs were found to be enriched in th cellspecific proteins transmembrane and cytosolic ev marker proteins and hla proteins relative to resting cd4 t cells evs restevs.
the proinflammatory effect of actevs vs restevs on donor matched apcs were characterized by chemokine and cytokine profiling and flow cytometry analysis.
there was no discernible contrast in endotoxin levels between actevs and restevs.
functional distinctions were seen to arise from variations in the content and composition of these evs.
moreover we validated our findings with an invivo investigation in mice demonstrating the recruitment of monocytes dendritic cells dcs neutrophils and nk cells in the spleen accompanied by the release of proinflammatory cytokines in the serum after administering actevs.
in summary this study sheds light on the role of th cell released evs in modulating the immune response during proinflammatory responses and this resource provides a foundation for development of novel therapeutics on ev based scaffolds."
"climate change is impacting marine ecosystems in the california current ecosystem cce through physical changes e.g.
an increase in the frequency and intensity of marine heatwaves that manifest biologically at all trophic levels.
we investigated range expansion into the cce and correlations with environment for a group of tropicalsubtropical seabirds.
we assessed changes in the abundance 20022022 of five species from the genus sula cocos bluefooted redfooted masked and nazca boobies using a novel compilation of four data sources atsea surveys n82 observations records from southeast farallon island n600 the california rare birds committee n593 and ebird a citizen science mobile application n 20529 and looked for relationships with the environment including broad temporal and spatial scale dynamics el niño southern oscillation local conditions where the bird was reported and potential source conditions from baja california sur and the gulf of california.
all five species increased in abundance and all with the exception of bluefooted exhibited a northward range expansion by as much as 6.8 degrees latitude and increased range area of between 2351013 within the cce.
there was increased abundance during warmer conditions el niño and warm sst for cocos redfooted masked and nazca boobies and all species increased by 6923015 after the extreme marine heatwaves that began in late 2013. our results document a tropical shift in seabirds of the cce which may present future challenges to resident species.
as marine heatwaves are projected to increase in frequency and intensity in addition to longterm warming we hypothesize that these species will continue to expand their range northward in the cce."
"the stimulation of cells by inflammatory mediators gives rise to intricate signaling cascades inducing specific biological functions.
the role of kinase activation for the establishment of specific inflammatory functions has only scarcely been established.
a timecourse analysis of human fetal fibroblasts stimulated with interleukin1β il1β andor dexamethasone dex was conducted using mass spectrometrybased proteomics and phosphoproteomics in conjunction with lysolipid and oxylipin profiling.
the il1β induced proteome alterations indicated metabolic transcriptional and translational activation including inflammatory marker proteins such as nos1 thbs1 and sting1.
the induction of mitochondrial proteins and the formation of numerous lysolipids indicated an increase in betaoxidation.
in addition to the nfκb and stat signaling pathways which are characteristic of inflammatory activation the map and akt kinase signaling pathways were found to be strongly induced.
six hours after treatment the observed signaling events exhibited a notable decline nearly returning to their initial states after 24 hours.
it is noteworthy that nearly all of these signaling activities were also observed in cells treated with dex alone.
additionally the proteome exhibited transient alterations which included proteins otherwise characteristic of an inflammatory response such as mmp3 and nfkb2.
activation of the kinase pikfyve was apparently specific for dexamethasone but constituted a minority of the total phosphorylation events.
only after 24 hours was the induction of proteins characteristic of glucocorticoids such as tsc22d3 and maoa observed.
the analysis of the effects of dexamethasone on the background of established inflammatory signaling verified the known inhibitory functions and resulted in the expression of antiinflammatory proteins and oxylipins but hardly affected the signaling events involving map and akt kinases.
in conclusion this data demonstrates that a majority of inflammationassociated signaling events in fibroblasts needs to be attributed to resource and stress management rather than the establishment of specific inflammatory effector functions."
"persistent hiv reservoirs in cd4 tcells pose a barrier to curing hiv infection.
we identified overexpression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 ezh2 in hivinfected cd4 tcells that survive cytotoxic t lymphocyte ctl exposure suggesting a mechanism of ctl resistance.
inhibition of ezh2 with the fdaapproved drug tazemetostat increased surface expression of major histocompatibility complex class i mhci on cd4 tcells counterbalancing hiv nefmediated mhci downregulation.
this improved ctlmediated elimination of hivinfected cells and suppressed viral replication in vitro.
in a participantderived xenograft mouse model tazemetostat elevated mhci and the proapoptotic protein bim in cd4 tcells facilitating cd8 tcellmediated reductions of hiv reservoir seeding.
additionally tazemetostat promoted sustained skewing of cd8 tcells toward less differentiated and exhausted phenotypes.
our findings reveal ezh2 overexpression as a novel mechanism of ctl resistance and support the clinical evaluation of tazemetostat to enhance clearance of hiv reservoirs and improve cd8 tcell function."
"communication between cells in metazoan organisms is mediated by a remarkably small number of highly conserved signaling pathways.
given the relatively small number of signaling pathways the existence of multiple related ligands for many of these pathways is thought to represent a key evolutionary innovation for encoding complexity into cellcell signaling.
relatedly crosstalk and other interactions between pathways is another critical feature which allows a modest number pathways to ultimately generate an enormously diverse range of outcomes.
it would thus be useful to have genetic tools to identify and manipulate not only those cells which express a given signaling ligand but also those cells that specifically coexpress pairs of signaling ligands.
here we present a collection of splitgal4 knockin lines targeting many of the ligands for highly conserved signaling pathways in  notch hedgehog fgf egf tgf jakstat jnk and pvr.
we demonstrate that these lines faithfully recapitulate the endogenous expression pattern of their targets and that they can be used to specifically identify the cells and tissues that coexpress pairs of signaling ligands.
as a proof of principle we demonstrate that the 4th chromosome tgf ligands  and  are broadly coexpressed in muscles and other tissues of both larva and adults and that the jakstat ligands  and  are partially coexpressed from cells of the midgut following gut damage.
together with our previously collection of splitgal4 lines targeting the seven wnt ligands this resource allows  researchers to identify and genetically manipulate cells that specifically express pairs of conserved ligands from nearly all the major intercellular signaling pathways."
"a route to prepare ribonucleoside triphosphates featuring a 3’aminoxy 3’onh removable blocking group is reported here.
we then show that versions of two dna polymerases human dna polymerase theta polθ and mimiviral primpol accept these triphosphates as substrates to add single nucleotides to an rna primer under engineered conditions.
cleaving the on bond in the 3’onh group within the extended primer regenerates the 3’oh group facilitating subsequent polymerase cycles that add a second selected nucleotide.
these enzymes and triphosphates together enable templateindependent enzymatic rna synthesis tiers exploiting a cyclic reversible termination framework.
the study shows that this process is ready for instrument adaptation by using it to add three ribonucleotides in three cycles using an engineered polθ.
this work creates a new way to synthesize rna with a de novo defined sequence without requiring the protecting groups hazardous solvents and sensitive reagents that bedevil phosphoramiditebased rna synthesis."
"many gpcrs initiate a second phase of g proteinmediated signaling from endosomes which inherently requires an increase in g protein activity on the endosome surface.
gcoupled gpcrs are thought to achieve this by internalizing and allosterically activating cognate g proteins again on the endosome membrane.
here we demonstrate that the μopioid receptor mor a gcoupled gpcr increases endosomal g protein activity in a different way.
leveraging conformational biosensors we resolve the subcellular activation dynamics of endogenously expressed mor and gsubclass g proteins.
we show that mor activation triggers a transient increase of activestate g on the plasma membrane that is followed by a prolonged increase on endosomes.
contrary to the gcoupled gpcr paradigm however we show that the morinduced increase of activestate g on endosomes requires neither internalization of mor nor activation of mor in the endosome membrane.
we propose a distinct and additional cellular mechanism for gpcrtriggered elevation of g protein activity on endosomes that is mediated by regulated trafficking of the activated g protein rather than its activating gpcr."
"most organisms traits result from the complex interplay of many genetic and environmental factors making their prediction from genotypes difficult.
here we used machine learning models to explore genotypephenotype connections for 223 life history traits measured across 1011 genomesequenced saccharomyces cerevisiae strains.
firstly we used genomewide association studies to connect genetic variants with the phenotypes.
next we benchmarked an automated machine learning pipeline that includes preprocessing feature selection and hyperparameters optimization in combination with multiple linear and complex machine learning methods.
we determined gradient boosting machines as best performing in 65 of predictions and pangenome as best predictor suggesting a considerable contribution of the accessory genome in controlling phenotypes.
the accuracy broadly varied among the phenotypes r  0.20.9 consistent with varying levels of complexity with stress resistance being easier to predict compared to growth across carbon and nitrogen nutrients.
while no specific genomic features could be linked to the predictions for most phenotypes machine learning identifies highimpact variants with established relationships to phenotypes despite being rare in the population.
nearperfect accuracies r0.95 were achieved when other phenomics data were used to aid predictions suggesting shared useful information can be conveyed across phenotypes.
overall our study underscores the power of machine learning to interpret the functional outcome of genetic variants."
"  is a widespread indopacific fish that is important in aquaculture recreational and commercial fisheries.
genetic divergences from different data sources and sampling schemes  have been reported.
to conduct phylogenetic and population genetic analyses from a geographically and phylogenetically representative data set to identify hierarchical divisions within .
we further test the evolutionary significance of genetic units in terms of signatures of adaptation.
using a wholegenome sequence data set of 61 fish including an outgroup we conducted phylogenetic and population genetic analyes.
we also generated measures of fst nucleotide diversity π and tajimas d d.  we identify three main lineages of  corresponding to the indian subcontinent southeast asia and australasia.
subdivision within each of the three main lineages is also identified and characterized.
adaptively significant differences are indicated within and between the three main lineages.
exhibits genetic divergences at different levels that originate before and during the pleistocene.
these divergences are associated with adaptive divergence but unclear phenotypic changes.
this study highlights the need for comprehensive sampling and integrative study of genotypes and phenotypes across the range of"
"seminal fluid proteins sfps are essential for reproductive success and evolve fast possibly driven by postcopulatory sexual selection pcss originating from sperm competition and cryptic female choice.
counterintuitively however the coding region only in few sfps evolves adaptively.
hence additional genomic and functional factors must play a role in sfp evolution independent of the protein coding region.
to shed light on drivers of sfp evolution we focus on those sfps predominantly expressed in male accessory glands because this allows examination of their evolution in the tissue which produces the majority of sfps.
moreover accessory glands develop normally in hybrids in contrast to testis allowing to control for changes in cellular environment arising during speciation.
here we discover that acp promoters contain hot spots for rapid evolution from accumulation of sequence changes and insertionsdeletions indels.
we further show that changes in promoter sequences are accompanied by gene expression divergence among closely related  species.
we then validate these observations in  hybrids to show that speciesspecific expression divergence of acps with rapidly evolving promoters are maintained in hybrids for some acps while others show dominance of one allele a phenomenon termed transvection.
these results indicate that cisregulatory evolution rather than genome background variation drives acp expression changes and promotes their rapid evolution."
"in the 2023 nature publication dissecting cell identity via network inference and in silico gene perturbation 1 the authors introduced celloracle co a novel method leveraging mrnaseq and atacseq data to construct gene regulatory networks grns which are subsequently used for gene perturbation.
they designed co to account for the role of distal cisregulatory elements e.g.
enhancers as well as proximal promoters in the gene regulation system.
for this purpose they employed cicero to determine the coaccessibility scores between peaks provided by atacseq data.
these scores are then used to identify the interaction of distal regions with the target gene.
using co they have conducted multiple perturbation studies on different organisms and identified novel phenotypes resulting from transcriptional factor tf perturbation.
in addition they benchmarked cos performance using chipseq data as ground truth against other stateoftheart grn methods across multiple mouse tissue samples.
however our evaluation reveals critical limitations in the implementation of their methodology both in terms of atacseq data integration as well as benchmarking.
in this report we first explain the limitations in their approach of integrating atacseq data.
we show that the proposed algorithm fails to account for distal regulatory interactions.
after we present the issues associated with their benchmarking algorithm and the data used for benchmarking.
we show that their findings regarding the comparative performance of co against other grn inference methods is invalid and requires further evaluation.
in conclusion we detect multiple inaccuracies in this paper which undermine the validity of their published protocol and the results.
the materials supporting our findings are accessible on github ."
"the flora and fauna of island systems especially those in the indopacific are renowned for their high diversification rates and outsized contribution to the development of evolutionary theories.
the total diversity of geographic radiations of many indopacific fauna is often incompletely sampled in phylogenetic studies due to the difficulty in obtaining single island endemic forms across the pacific and the relatively poor performance of degraded dna when using museum specimens for inference of evolutionary relationships.
new methods for production and analysis of genomewide datasets sourced from degraded dna are facilitating insights into the complex evolutionary histories of these influential island faunas.
here we leverage whole genome resequencing 20x average coverage and extensive sampling of all taxonomic diversity within  kingfishers a rapid radiation of largely island endemic ‘great speciators.’ we find that whole genome datasets do not outright resolve the evolutionary relationships of this clade four types of molecular markers uces buscos snps and mtdna and tree building methods did not find a single wellsupported and concordant specieslevel topology.
we then uncover evidence of widespread incomplete lineage sorting and both ancient and contemporary gene flow and demonstrate how these factors contribute to conflicting evolutionary histories.
our complete taxonomic sampling allowed us to further identify a novel case of mitochondrial capture between two allopatric species suggesting a potential historical but since lost hybrid zone as islands were successively colonized.
taken together these results highlight how increased genomic and taxon sampling can reveal complex evolutionary patterns in rapid island radiations."
"fibroblast activation drives fibrotic diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis.
however the complex interplay of how tissue mechanics and macrophage signals combine to influence fibroblast activation is not well understood.
here we use hyaluronic acid hydrogels as a tunable cell culture system to mimic lung tissue stiffness and viscoelasticity.
we applied this platform to investigate the influence of macrophage signaling on fibroblast activation.
fibroblasts cultured on stiff 50 kpa hydrogels mimicking fibrotic tissue exhibit increased activation as measured by spreading as well as type i collagen and cadherin11 expression compared to fibroblasts cultured on soft 1 kpa viscoelastic hydrogels mimicking normal tissue.
these trends were unchanged in fibroblasts cultured with macrophageconditioned media.
however fibroblasts directly cocultured with m2 macrophages show increased activation even on soft viscoelastic hydrogels that normally suppress activation.
inhibition of interleukin 6 il6 signaling does not change activation in fibroblastonly cultures but ameliorates the profibrotic effects of m2 macrophage coculture.
these results underscore the ability of direct m2 macrophage coculture to override hydrogel viscoelasticity to promote fibroblast activation in an il6dependent manner.
this work also highlights the utility of using hydrogels to deconstruct complex tissue microenvironments to better understand the interplay between microenvironmental mechanical and cellular cues."
"xist a pivotal player in x chromosome inactivation xci has long been perceived as a cisacting long noncoding rna that binds exclusively to the inactive x chromosome xi.
however xists ability to diffuse under select circumstances has also been documented leading us to suspect that xist rna may have targets and functions beyond the xi.
here using female mouse embryonic stem cells es and mouse embryonic fibroblasts mef as models we demonstrate that xist rna indeed can localize beyond the xi.
however its binding is limited to approximately 100 genes in cells undergoing xci es cells and in postxci cells mefs.
the target genes are diverse in function but are unified by their active chromatin status.
xist binds discretely to promoters of target genes in neighborhoods relatively depleted for polycomb marks contrasting with the broad polycombenriched domains reported for human xist rna.
we find that xist binding is associated with downmodulation of autosomal gene expression.
however unlike on the xi xist binding does not lead to full silencing and also does not spread beyond the target gene.
overexpressing xist in transgenic es cells similarly leads to autosomal gene suppression while deleting xists repeat b motif reduces autosomal binding and perturbs autosomal downregulation.
furthermore treating female es cells with the xist inhibitor x1 leads to loss of autosomal suppression.
altogether our findings reveal that xist targets 100 genes beyond the xi identify repeat b as a crucial domain for its intrans function in mice and indicate that autosomal targeting can be disrupted by a small molecule inhibitor."
"the killing mechanism of many antibiotics involves the induction of dna damage either directly or indirectly which triggers the sos response.
reca the master regulator of the sos response plays a crucial role in driving the evolution of resistance to fluoroquinolone antibiotics treated with a single dose of ciprofloxacin.
however the precise roles of reca and sos responses in the development of resistance under shortterm βlactam exposure remain unclear.
in the present study we observed a fast evolution of βlactam resistance 20fold increase in mic in 8 hours in e. coli after deleting reca and exposing the bacteria to a single dose of ampicillin.
notably once this type of resistance is established it remains stable and can be passed on to subsequent generations.
unlike earlier studies we found that the rapid development of resistance relies on the hindrance of dna repair a mechanism that operates independently of the sos response.
additionally we identified the rapid emergence of drug resistance associated mutations in the resistant bacterial genome indicating the impairment of dna repair.
through comprehensive transcriptome sequencing we discovered that the expression of numerous antioxidative response genes is repressed in reca mutant resistant isolates resulting in an excessive accumulation of ros within the cells.
this suggests that the induction of ros drives the fast evolution of antibiotic resistance in recadeficient bacteria.
collectively we show that the hindrance of dna repair hampers cellular fitness provides bacteria with genetic adaptability to survive in diverse stressful environments and accelerates the evolution of antibiotic resistance."
"invading new territory is a central aspect of the microbial lifestyle allowing microbes to expand to remote locations and pathogens to spread and infect their hosts.
however invading microbes rarely find novel territories uninhabited.
in such a scenario resident microbes can interact with the newcomers and in many cases impede their invasion an effect known as biotic resistance.
accordingly invasions are shaped by the interplay between dispersal and resistance.
however these two factors are difficult to disentangle or manipulate in natural systems making their interplay difficult to understand.
to address this challenge we tracked microbial invasions in the lab over space and time first in a model system of two interacting microbes then in a multistrain system involving a pathogen invading resident communities.
in the presence of biotic resistance we observed three qualitatively different invasion regimes consistent pulsed and pinned where in the third regime strong biotic resistance stalled the invasion entirely despite ongoing invader dispersal.
surprisingly these rich invasion dynamics could be qualitatively predicted with a simple parameterfree framework that ignores individual species interactions even for rather complex communities.
moreover we showed that this simple framework could accurately predict simulated invasions from different mechanistic models indicating its broad applicability.
our work offers a thorough understanding of how biotic resistance impacts invasions and introduces a predictive tool to identify invasionresistant communities."
"a principal reason for the high global morbidity and mortality of tuberculosis tb is the lack of efficacy of the only licensed tb vaccine bacillus calmetteguerin bcg as parenteral bcg does not induce local pulmonary immune memory.
animal studies have shown that mucosal bcg vaccination provides superior protection against tb due to generation of lung resident memory t cells trm.
here we demonstrated that following mucosal vaccination with the genetically modified virulent bcg strain bcgrd1 distal airway epithelial progenitors were mobilized to assist with restoration of alveolar epithelium.
by way of their migrationmediated activation of latent tgfβ lung cd8 trm differentiation was induced.
mucosal vaccinations using nonvirulent strains of bcg in which airway epithelial progenitors were not mobilized as well as genetic inhibition of migrationmediated activation of tgfβ resulted in significantly lower numbers of lung cd8 trm.
in addition we discovered cd8 cells with exlung and stemlike trm phenotypes that persisted in the lungdraining mediastinal lymph nodes for up to four months following mucosal bcg vaccination.
these results link airway epithelial progenitormediated repair of injured lung tissue with induction of resident t cell memory and delineate why persistence of trm in the lung is shortlived.
these findings may explain why mucosal vaccination with virulent bcg strains is more protective against tb and thus have notable implications for future tb vaccine development."
"glucose sensing and monitoring are crucial for biological and medical applications.
compared to existing methods realtime detection and longterm monitoring are still required.
singlewalled carbon nanotubes swcnts have excellent optical properties for sensing applications which provide the possibility for designing a new generation of glucose sensors.
in this study we describe a method for covalently conjugate glucose oxidase gox on swcnts as an optical glucose sensor.
the functional groups are introduced by a photocatalytic reaction which acts as the handle for protein loading on swcnts.
in this sp3 defect reaction the optical properties of swcnts can be maintained.
with a convenient bioconjugation reaction the gox could be covalently linked with swcnts.
compared to the noncovalent immobilization conjugates the covalent conjugate sensor exhibits a much stronger optical response toward glucose and the stability of the biosensor also increases in harsh conditions.
at the same time we also report the changing ratio of the original e11 and defected e11 peak during the bioconjugation reaction which is also inspiring for reaction monitoring on swcnts."
"the probability of encountering conspecifics shapes multiple dimensions of animal behaviour.
for example territorial individuals increase vigilance scent marking and alarm calling when approaching home range boundaries.
whether territorial predators modify their foraging behaviours with respect to the probability of encountering neighbouring territory owners is poorly understood.
however this could strongly influence the landscape of predation risk and therefore modulate predatorprey interactions.
we studied the movements and behaviours of 23 resident arctic foxes occupying neighbouring home ranges during two years of contrasting resource availability abundant resources in 2019 scarce resources in 2022 on bylot island nunavut canada.
first based on simultaneous gps tracking of individuals we established which individuals used a territory an exclusive area by estimating the spatial distribution of the probability of encountering a neighbour within their home range.
second using gps and accelerometry data we evaluated if the probability of encountering a neighbour influenced the spatial distribution of foraging behaviours and whether this relationship differed between territorial and nonterritorial individuals.
when resources were abundant only breeding individuals excluded other foxes from a part of their home range and were thus territorial.
when resources were rare none of the foxes reproduced and all but one were territorial.
nonterritorial individuals in 2019 were less likely to cache prey in areas with a high probability of encounter possibly reducing the risk of cache pilfering.
we found no effect of the probability of encounter on the behaviours of the nonterritorial individual in 2022. the probability to cache prey of territorial individuals however did not depend on the probability of encountering a neighbour suggesting they have no benefit of modulating the distribution of their caches according to potential encounters in a partly exclusive area.
our results thus suggest that arctic foxes use different tactics to secure resources based on their degree of territoriality and the availability of resources.
we highlight how the presence of resident but nonterritorial predators whose home ranges overlap those of their territorial neighbours may influence the distribution of predation risk by creating zones where predator density is high potentially influencing predatorprey interactions."
"gene regulatory mechanisms that modulate rna polymerase ii activity are difficult to access in mammalian tissues composed of multiple cell lineages.
here we develop a nascent rna assay precisseq that measures lineagespecific transcriptionallyengaged pol ii on genes and dna enhancer elements in intact mouse tissue.
by employing keratinocytes as a prototype lineage we unearth pol ii promoterrecruitment versus pauserelease mechanisms operating in adult skin homeostasis.
moreover we relate active enhancer proximity and transcription factor binding motifs on promoters to pol ii activity and promoterproximal pausing level.
finally we find pol ii firing rapidly into elongation on lineage identity genes and highly paused on cellular safeguarding genes in a contextdependent manner.
our work provides a basic platform to investigate mechanistic principles of gene regulation in individual lineages of complex mammalian tissues."
"plantbased meat can help combat climate change and health risks associated with high meat consumption.
to create adequate mimics of animal meats plantbased meats must match in mouthfeel taste and texture.
the gold standard to characterize the texture of meat is the double compression test but this test suffers from a lack of standardization and reporting inconsistencies.
here we characterize the texture of five plantbased and three animal meats using texture profile analysis and rheology and report ten mechanical features associated with each product’s elasticity viscosity and loss of integrity.
our findings suggest that of all ten features the stiffness storage and loss moduli are the most meaningful and consistent parameter to report while other parameters suffer from a lack of interpretability and inconsistent definitions.
we find that the sample stiffness varies by an order of magnitude from 418.9±41.7kpa for plantbased turkey to 56.7±14.1kpa for tofu.
similarly the storage and loss moduli vary from 50.4± 4.1kpa and 25.3±3.0kpa for plantbased turkey to 5.7±0.5kpa and 1.3±0.1kpa for tofu.
all three animal products animal turkey sausage and hotdog consistently rank in between these two extremes.
our results suggest that–with the right ingredients additives and formulae–modern food fabrication techniques can create plantbased meats that successfully replicate the full viscoelastic texture spectrum of processed animal meat."
"lupins are key grain legumes for future crop production providing highly sustainable protein essential in the face of global warming food security challenges and the need for sustainable agriculture.
despite their potential lupin crops are frequently devastated by colletotrichum lupini a member of the top ten fungal pathogenic genera in the world.
in our previous study we identified llur1 the first c. lupini resistance gene in a wild lupinus luteus accession.
further research was necessary to unravel the defense mechanisms involved.
histological analysis revealed a hypersensitive response against c. lupini while transcriptome analysis highlighted a complex network of differentially expressed genes including tirnbslrr proteins hypersensitive response and phenylpropanoid pathways.
snps were identified that distinguish the protein sequences underlying immunity.
these findings along with orthology in other lupin species offer valuable insights for developing breeding strategies to enhance c. lupini resistance in lupins with significant potential impacts on food feed and human nutrition."
"currently type 1 diabetes t1d can be treated through implantation of allogenic islets which replenish the beta cell population however this method requires an extensive postimplantation immunosuppressant regimen.
personalized cellular therapy can address this through implantation of an autologous cell population induced pluripotent stem cells ipscs.
cellular therapy however requires an encapsulation device for implantation and so to achieve this uniformly with cells in a clinical setting bioprinting is required.
bioprinting is dependent on having a bioink that is printable retains structural fidelity after printing and is supportive of cell type and function.
the objective of this study was to design and develop bioinks that were compatible with printing islets.
here we detail the successful bioprinting of both primary human islets and ipscderived islets embedded in an alginatemethylcellulose bioink with functionality sustained within the construct for both cell lineages.
scrnaseq analysis also revealed that printing did not adversely affect the genetic expression and metabolic functionality of the ipscderived islets.
importantly the ipscderived islets displayed comparable functionality to the primary islets indicating the potential to act as a cell source alternative for t1d implantation."
"cognitive aging creates major individual and societal burden motivating search for treatment and preventive care strategies.
behavioural interventions can improve cognitive performance in older age but effects are small.
basic research has implicated dopaminergic signaling in plasticity.
we investigated whether transient enhancement of dopaminergic neurotransmission via administration of ldopa improves effects of cognitive training on performance."
"climate changeinduced heatwaves threaten global biodiversity including crucial pollinators like bumblebees.
despite alarming projections little is known about the effects of shortterm heatwaves on insect larval development.
hence we investigated the impact of simulated heatwaves on the development of fourth instar larvae l4 of"
"predicting mhcii restricted epitopes across species used to be challenging but alphafold af may provide a structurebased panprediction solution.
in this study we established the new tool afpred with a clear standard for quantitative prediction results.
compared to the sequencebased tools heavily trained with human ligandome afpred does not show an advantage in predicting the binding patterns of human hlaii but has far better performance in predicting the binding patterns of other animals mhcii.
using recently resolved bat mhcii structures we analyzed afpreds prediction capability logic and limitation.
in addition we also explored the impact of af algorithm iterations on the prediction of mhcii restricted epitopes.
the results demonstrated that afpred is capable of crossspecies prediction of mhcii restricted epitopes and is conducive to the development of novel veterinary vaccines."
"circular rna circrna vaccines are emerging as a revolutionary strategy in cancer immunotherapy offering novel mechanisms for inducing robust and durable immune responses.
unlike traditional linear mrna vaccines circrnas exhibit exceptional stability enhanced translational efficiency and resistance to exonuclease degradation making them ideal candidates for vaccine development.
recent studies have shown that circrna vaccines play an important and specialized role in cancer treatment.
however there are currently no relevant bibliometric studies.
this study aimed to apply bibliometrics and scientometrics to summarize the knowledge structure and research hotspots regarding the role of circrna vaccines in cancer.
publications related to circrna vaccines in cancer were searched on the scopus database.
vosviewer and scopus were used to conduct the analyses.
this study summarizes the research trends and development of circrna vaccines for cancer and also a comparative analysis between mrna cancer vaccine and circrna cancer vaccine identifying potential areas of focus innovation and growth.
this information will provide a reference for researchers to studying circrna vaccines against cancer due to its increasing trends over recent times."
"rapidly dividing cells can eliminate slow growing neighbors through the apoptotic process of cell competition.
this process ensures that only high fitness cells populate embryonic tissues and is proposed to underlie the ability of oncogenetransformed cells to progressively replace normal cells within a tissue.
patches of cells in the  wing disc overexpressing the oncogenic taiman tai transcriptional coactivator kill normal neighbors by secreting spz ligands that trigger proapoptotic toll signaling in receiving cells.
however extracellular signaling mechanisms responsible for elimination of slow growing cells by normal neighbors remain poorly defined.
here we show that slow growing cells with reduced tai tai are killed by normal neighbors through a mechanism involving competition for the wingless wgwnt ligand.
elevated wg signaling significantly rescues elimination of tai cells in multiple organs suggesting that tai may normally promote wg activity.
examining distribution of wg components reveals that tai promotes extracellular spread of the wg ligand from source cells across the wing disc thus ensuring patterned expression of multiple wgregulated target genes.
tai controls wg spread indirectly through the extracellular glypican dallylike protein dlp which binds wg and promotes its extracellular diffusion and capture by receptors.
data indicate that tai likely controls dlp at two levels transcription of  mrna and dlp intracellular trafficking.
overall these data indicate that the tai acts through dlp to enable wg transport and signaling and that cell competition in the tai model arises due to inequity in the ability of epithelial cells to sequester limiting amounts of the wg growth factor."
"atpdependent proteases play key roles in bacterial protein quality control and regulation of cellular processes.
clpyq and clpxp are atpdependent proteases in the grampositive bacteria bacillus subtilis.
to date no substrate proteins of b. subtilis clpyq have been characterized.
the protease component encoded by clpq is synthetically lethal with clpp and the two genes are nonessential individually suggesting potentially redundant roles for clpyq and clpxp.
previous quantitative proteomic data predicted that b. subtilis proteins diviva and mbl components of the divisome and elongasome respectively are potential substrates of clpyq.
the role of diviva and mbl in cell division and elongation suggests a significant role of clpyq in regulating cell division through targeted degradation of key divisome and elongasome proteins.
here we confirm that diviva and mbl are degraded by clpyq both in vitro and in vivo and thus identify the first two substrates of clpyq in b. subtilis."
"immunoglobulin a iga is the most abundant antibody isotype produced across mammals and plays a specialized role in mucosal homeostasis1.
constantly secreted into the lumen of the intestine iga binds commensal microbiota to regulate their colonization and function23 with unclear implications for health.
iga deficiency is common in humans but is difficult to study due to its complex aetiology and comorbidities48.
using genetically and environmentally controlled mice here we show that igadeficient animals have increased susceptibility to endogenous colorectal tumours.
cellular and molecular analyses revealed that in the absence of iga colonic epithelial cells induce antibacterial factors and accelerate cell cycling in response to the microbiota.
oral treatment with iga was sufficient to both reduce steadystate proliferation and protect mice from tumours but this function was due to antibody structure rather than binding specificity.
in both organoid and monolayer culture systems iga directly suppressed epithelial growth.
coimmunoprecipitation mass spectrometry and a targeted crispr screen identified dmbt1 as an igabinding epithelial surface protein required for igamediated suppression of proliferation.
together iga and dmbt1 regulate notch signalling and tune the normal cycling of absorptive colonocyte progenitors.
in mice deleting the transmembrane and cytoplasmic signalling portions of dmbt1 or blocking notch signalling was sufficient to reverse both the increased proliferation and tumour susceptibility of iga knockouts.
these experiments establish a homeostatic function for iga in tempering physiological epithelial responses to microbiota to maintain mucosal health."
"insect herbivores employ many adaptive mechanisms to successfully colonize host plants.
transcriptional plasticity is one important mechanism that enables host use in polyphagous insects that maintain a broad host range.
however whether specialist herbivores also rely on transcriptional plasticity to feed successfully on different hosts remains largely unexplored.
here we measure genomewide transcriptional plasticity of grape phylloxera daktulosphaira vitifoliae a grapevine vitis spp.
specialist after transfer onto different host grapevines for a single generation using rnaseq.
we show that the transcriptome of d. vitifoliae is highly plastic and responsive to host genotype  4820 genes 37 of the 12876 expressed genes are significantly differentially expressed in at least one contrast comparing host genotypes.
genes with functions related to host manipulation predicted secretory effectors cuticle and chitin detoxification of xenobiotics and development were enriched among hostresponsive genes with predicted secretory effectors being most strongly enriched fishers exact test odds ratio  8.3 bhadjusted pvalue  0. we further linked gene coexpression modules to d. vitifoliae fitness using weighted gene coexpression network analysis.
the coexpression module most strongly correlated with fitness was enriched for predicted secretory effectors including a novel group of prolinerich genes that exist as a tandem gene cluster.
the only module negatively correlated with fitness was enriched for genes encoding glycoside hydrolase enzymes that function in carbohydrate metabolism.
overall our results show that the phylloxerid transcriptome is highly plastic and rapidly reprogrammed when transferred onto distinct hosts which may be an adaptive mechanism underlying host use in this clonally reproducing herbivore."
"platelets are derived from megakaryocytes either in peripheral or pulmonic circulation.
the transcriptome of megakaryocytes has been studied while the platelet transcriptome is thought to be a reflection of their parent cells it has not yet been investigated.
although platelets lack nuclei they inherit rna from their parent megakaryocytes while only about 10 of them are believed to contain enough rna for meaningful analysis.
this study explores the potential of singlecell rna sequencing to analyze the platelet transcriptome aiming to expand our understanding of platelets beyond their traditional role in coagulation.
using acridine orange staining and antibodybased sequencing we successfully sequenced rna from seven healthy donors.
results revealed significant heterogeneity in gene expression with common platelet markers such as itga2b and gp1b being less abundant than expected.
interestingly immune markers associated with lung megakaryocytes were not strongly represented in peripheral platelets.
comparison with current algorithms for cell identification suggests that platelets are often misclassified as other blood cell types highlighting limitations of existing pipelines in platelet annotation.
this misclassification may have led to misrepresentation of platelet transcriptomics in previous studies.
these findings underscore the need for tailored sequencing methods to accurately profile platelets and set the foundation for further exploration of platelet biology and immune function potentially opening avenues for therapeutic interventions in immune modulation drug delivery and the use of platelets as disease biomarkers in cancer and other conditions."
"gamma delta γδ t cells are defined by their unique ability to recognize a limited repertoire of nonpeptide nonmhcassociated antigens on transformed and pathogeninfected cells.
in addition to their lack of alloreactivity γδ t cells exhibit properties distinct from other lymphocyte subsets prompting significant interest in their development as an offtheshelf cellular immunotherapeutic.
however their low abundance in circulation heterogeneity limited methods for ex vivo expansion and underdeveloped methodologies for genetic modification have hindered basic study and clinical application of γδ t cells.
here we implement a feederfree scalable approach for ex vivo manufacture of polyclonal nonvirally modified gene edited chimeric antigen receptor carγδ t cells in support of therapeutic application.
engineered carγδ t cells demonstrate high function in vitro and and in vivo.
longitudinal in vivo pharmacokinetic profiling of adoptively transferred polyclonal carγδ t cells uncover subsetspecific responses to il15 cytokine armoring and multiplex base editing.
our results present a robust platform for genetic modification of polyclonal carγδ t cells and present unique opportunities to further define synergy and the contribution of discrete engineered carγδ t cell subsets to therapeutic efficacy in vivo."
"bilateral limbal stem cell deficiency lscd is a significant cause of corneal blindness and is more difficult to treat as compared with unilateral lscd because no source of autologous limbal stem cells lscs remains in these patients.
thus bilateral patients could be candidates for treatment with allogeneic lsc transplants that require longterm systemic immunosuppression therapy.
thus if possible for the correct candidates using autologous lscs could be a preferred treatment.
recent in vivo laser confocal microscopic examination of the ocular surface in situ combined with impression cytology has indicated that some patients diagnosed with a complete bilateral lscd possess residual lscs.
however it remains unknown whether these residual lscs still have stem cell potential due to the lack of animal models that mimic this pathology.
the goal of the current study is to make a complete lscd model that possesses evidence of residual lscs.
we induced complete lscd in mice using two methods 1 removed the corneal epithelium and the epithelial basement membrane using a rotating burr and 2 removed the corneal epithelium using 20 ethanol but retained an intact epithelial basement membrane.
a complete lscd was defined by a lack of ck12positive corneal epithelial cells and the presence of infiltrating ck19positive conjunctival epithelial cells.
corneas were examined for wound closure corneal opacity lsc exhaustion and inflammation.
we observed that complete lscd mice without an intact epithelial basement membrane resulted in few residual lscs.
by contrast complete lscd mice that retained the epithelial basement membrane were accompanied by a reduced inflammatory response plus a significant number of residual lscs.
this model will allow future studies to determine the function of residual lscs in complete lscd."
"members of the ralstonia solanacearum species complex are soilborne pathogens of important crop plants.
strainlevel host specialisation is considered typical yet outbreak monitoring in martinique revealed a new lineage with dramatically expanded host range had emerged.
our analysis shows the outbreak in martinique was caused by the expansion of lineages from two different ralstonia species.
one lineage is of asian origin and retains a signature of host specialisation while the emergent broad host range lineage originated in the americas.
the presence of similar integrative and conjugative elements ices in both lineages suggests they are exchanging genetic material.
the emergent lineage acquired novel prophage along with genes encoding novel catalytic and metabolic functions but shows little variation among the virulence proteins considered host specificity determinants.
we postulate that host range expansion is not caused by the evolution of a virulence strategy targeting host immunity but is rather due to the acquisition of novel pathways for substrate metabolism enhancing pathogen fitness in soil or plant tissues."
"peerreview and publication are important parts of the scientific enterprise and research has shown that engaging students in such scholarly practices helps build their sense of belonging and scientific identity.
yet these disciplinary literacy skills and professional practices are often part of the hidden curriculum of science research thus excluding students and others from fully understanding ways in which scientific knowledge is constructed refined and disseminated even though students are participating in such activities.
secondary students are increasingly involved in scientific research projects that include authentic disciplinary literacy components such as research proposals posters videos and scientific research papers.
more and more students are also engaging in professional practice of publishing their scientific research papers through dedicated secondary science journals.
how teachers and other mentors support the development of professional disciplinary literacies in students is critical to understand as part of supporting more student participation in research.
to this end we used a mixed methods study of interviews and surveys to examine the experience and conceptions of the mentors teachers and professional scientists who guided precollege students through the writing and publication of their scientific research projects.
analyzing our data from a lens of cognitive apprenticeship we find that mentors encourage independence by primarily employing the method of “exploration”.
we also find that mentors have divergent views on the value of publication within science versus for student scientists specifically.
our findings suggest that mentors could work to explicitly reveal their own thinking within science writing to provide more sequenced support for student scientists."
" none.
no competing interests."
"solar radiation sr dynamics have a profound effect on plant growth development and ecosystems and they act as a primary energy source and important environmental signal that plants perceive through their photoreceptors which primarily sense critical wavelength ratios cwrs.
the diffuse fraction of solar radiation df is a key factor affecting the quality and distribution of light within the plant canopy.
we analyzed one year of sr spectral observations measured by a groundbased rotating shadowband spectroradiometer to evaluate the potential effects of df and cwrs on plants in an outdoor environment in fukuoka japan.
the daily mean df and all considered cwrs showed significant seasonal variations regardless of the solar meridian altitude.
cloudy or partly cloudy skies were prevalent throughout the year.
the ratios of ultravioleta uvauvb red rblue b and rgreen g increased during winter and decreased during summer.
conversely the ratios of photosynthetically active radiation parglobal solar radiation gsi uvgsi uvpar bg rfarred fr and uvbb increased during summer and decreased during winter.
most of the cwr correlated with df.
furthermore our study discovered a synergistic influence of air mass am water vapor pressure vp and df on specific cwrs which play a crucial role in plant light signal processing.
this highlights the potential influence of am vp and df on plant light signals thereby opening avenues for developing innovative plant growth models and ecological responses incorporating plant photoreception."
"climate changeinduced heatwaves threaten global biodiversity including crucial pollinators like bumblebees.
despite alarming projections little is known about the effects of shortterm heatwaves on insect larval development.
hence we investigated the impact of simulated heatwaves on the development of fourth instar larvae l4 of  l. hymenoptera apidae using an  rearing method.
individual larvae were incubated at 37°c and 38°c for a period of 4 days with a constant rearing temperature of 34°c as the control.
we examined body weight gain developmental duration survival to adult stage and adult body size i.e.
dry mass itd and head width.
a simulated heatwave of 37°c did not significantly affect larval development but 38°c impaired larval body mass gain.
while developmental duration and adult body size were unaffected an acute heat stress of 38°c during the l4 stage reduced the probability of pupae reaching adulthood.
these findings highlight the potential for heatwaves to negatively affect bee populations by impairing larval growth and reducing survival to the adult stage which may have severe implication for colony fitness."
nad
"the present study sets out to explore the cognitive underpinnings of reading acquisition in arabic.
previous studies have identified phonological awareness and rapid automatized naming as early predictors.
however the graphic complexity of arabic letters imposes particular constraints on the visual system which should mobilize visual attention.
to test this hypothesis 101 arabicspeaking children who just began their formal reading instruction in arabic were administered tests of syllable and word reading.
their nonverbal reasoning vocabulary phonological awareness rapid automatized naming and letter knowledge were measured.
their visual attention was estimated through tasks of visual attention span.
we found that phonological awareness visual attention span and letter knowledge were associated with reading outcomes.
however regression analyses showed that the relationship between visual attention span and reading disappeared when letter knowledge was takenintoaccount.
we used structural equation modeling to examine the direct and indirect effects of visual attention span to reading.
results showed that phonological awareness and letter knowledge were significant and independent predictors of reading while visual attention span contributed only indirectly through its influence on letter knowledge.
our findings suggest that beginning readers rely on visual attention to identify and discriminate visuallycomplex arabic letters.
in turn more efficient letter identification in children with higher visual attention facilitates reading acquisition.
these findings support the cognitive models of word recognition that include visual attention as a component of the reading system.
they open new perspectives for crosslanguage studies suggesting that visual attention might contribute differently to reading depending on the orthographic system.
they also provide a foundation for innovative teaching methodologies in arabic language education."
"environmental changes often induce global variations on bacterial gene expression frequently accompanied by alterations in growth rates.
integrating nonmetabolic cellular processes such as gene expression and macromolecule synthesis with metabolic modeling remains a significant challenge in systems biology due to the lack of mechanistic representation of gene regulation.
here we introduce a novel constraintbased modeling framework called dynamic constrained allocation flux balance analysis dcafba which comprehensively integrates metabolism cellular resource allocation and gene regulation.
we employ a quasisteadystate assumption positing that reaction fluxes achieve balance at each time step adapting more rapidly than protein synthesis and growth dilution.
this approach enables the prediction of reaction flux dynamics and protein allocation necessary to achieve cellular objectives such as optimizing growth during various growth shifts including carbon amino acid and transcriptional signal without detailing molecular gene regulations.
our model offers a new method for interpreting proteome allocation and cellular metabolism in complex and transient environments providing mechanistic insights valuable for metabolic engineering."
"intestinal microbiota composition is implicated in several diseases understanding the factors that influence it are key to elucidating hostcommensal interactions and to designing microbiometargeted therapies.
we quantified how diet influences microbiome dynamics in hospitalized patients.
we recorded 9419 meals consumed by 173 patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplantation and profiled the microbiome in 1009 longitudinally collected stool samples from 158 of them.
caloric intake was correlated with fecal microbiota diversity.
bayesian inference revealed associations between intake of sweets or sugars during antibiotic exposure with microbiome disruption as assessed by low diversity or expansion of the pathobiont enterococcus.
we validated this observation experimentally finding that sucrose exacerbated antibioticinduced enterococcus expansion in mice.
taken together our results suggest that avoiding sugarrich foods during antibiotic treatment may reduce microbiome injury."
"an approach to age modeling involves the supervised prediction of age using machine learning from subject features.
the derived age metrics are used to study the relationship between healthy and pathological aging in multiple body systems as well as the interactions between them.
we lack a standard for this type of age modeling.
in this work we developed ageml an opensource software for ageprediction from any type of tabular clinical data following wellestablished and tested methodologies.
the objective is to set standards for reproducibility and standardization of reporting in supervised age modeling tasks.
ageml does age modeling calculates age deltas the difference between predicted and chronological age measures correlations between age deltas and factors visualizes differences in age deltas of different clinical populations and classifies clinical populations based on age deltas.
with this software we are able to reproduce published work and unveil novel relationships between body organs and polygenetic risk scores.
ageml is age modeling made easy for standardization and reproducibility."
"the role of auxin indole3acetic acid iaa a phytohormone with numerous morphogenic functions is now wellestablished in land plants.
although the role of iaa and its transport in algae remains unclear pindriven auxin export is probably an ancient and conserved trait within streptophytes.
among streptophyte algae chara represents a genus with a considerable degree of complexity in body arrangement.
this study investigates the auxin response and characterizes homologs of land plant pin auxin efflux carriers in chara braunii.
through  regeneration experiments we observed that iaa significantly promotes elongation of thallus and side branch development upon thallus tip decapitation indicating an effect on morphogenesis.
we show that iaa is actively uptaken and metabolized by thallus cells and that this process is influenced by n1naphthylphthalamic acid npa.
to elucidate the underlying mechanisms we cloned and sequenced the most expressed chara braunii pins cbpina and cbpinc.
using epitopespecific antibodies we showed their presence in the plasma membrane pm of vegetative internodal cells and generative antheridial cells.
functional tests in tobacco by2 cells supported by in silico docking of iaa and npa to cbpina and cbpinc showed that pmlocalized cbpina interferes with auxin transport in contrast to erlocalized cbpinc.
finally our phosphoproteome analysis indicated that iaa rapidly induces specific phosphorylation events including raflike kinase phosphorylation highlighting a potential role for iaa in fast signaling processes in chara braunii.
altogether we provide new insights into iaa role in chara braunii morphogenesis and suggest that while the canonical auxin transport mechanism may not be conserved auxin still may likely play a role in rapid signaling pathways in this close relative of land plants."
leaf rust caused by
 cosenior authors
"the chromatins are folded into threedimensional 3d structures inside cells which coordinates the regulation of gene transcription by the noncoding regulatory elements.
aberrant chromatin 3d folding has been shown in many diseases such as acute myeloid leukemia aml and may contribute to tumorigenesis.
the anthracycline topoisomerase ii inhibitors can induce histone eviction and dna damage.
we performed genomewide highresolution mapping of the chemotherapeutic effects of various clinically used anthracycline drugs.
atacseq was used to profile the histone eviction effects of different anthracyclines.
top2a chipseq was used to profile the potential dna damage regions.
integrated analyses show that different anthracyclines have distinct target selectivity on epigenomic regions based on their respective atacseq and chipseq profiles.
we identified the underlying molecular mechanism that unique anthracycline variants selectively target chromatin looping anchors via disrupting ctcf binding suggesting an additional potential therapeutic effect on the 3d genome.
we further performed hic experiments and data from k562 cells treated with the selective anthracycline drugs indicate that the 3d chromatin organization is disrupted.
furthermore aml patients receiving anthracycline drugs showed altered chromatin structures around potential looping anchors which linked to distinct clinical outcomes.
our data indicate that anthracyclines are potent and selective epigenomic targeting drugs and can target the 3d genome for anticancer therapy which could be used for personalized medicine to treat tumors with aberrant 3d chromatin structures."
"sex chromosome turnover has occurred in many groups and is mediated by the translocation or duplication of apical sexdetermining genes or the replacement of original sex determination genes by new ones.
in dioecious plants the former frequently occurs while the latter is rarely reported.
here we assembled four haplotyperesolved chromosomelevel genomes from four lineages of the salix polyclona complex including three diploids e ets and w1 and one autotetraploid w2.
our analyses reveal that diploids have a zwzz system while autotetraploid has a zzzwzzzz system on chromosome 15. the apical sexdetermining genes of salicaceae arr17like duplicates on chromosomes 15 and 19 which can indirectly turnonoff the expression of pistillata pi gene and determine sex appears to have lost the function of sex determination in the s. polyclona complex.
we found a novel sex determining factor on the 15w of the complex namely partial pilike duplicates which has taken over the function from the arr17like duplicates.
in conclusion a new dominant sexdetermining gene was recruited in the s. polyclona complex replacing the ancestral apical sexdetermining arr17like duplicates.
the newly identified partial pilike duplicates exhibit a direct influence on the downstream intact pilike duplications providing valuable insights into the evolutionary trajectory of the topdown sex determination pathway."
"in many multicellular organisms sexual development is not determined by xxxy or zwzz systems but by uv sex chromosomes.
in uv systems sex determination occurs in the haploid phase with u chromosomes in females and v chromosomes in males.
here we explore several male female and partially sexreversed male lines of giant kelp to decipher how uv sex chromosomes and autosomes initiate male versus female development.
we identify a key set of genes on the sex chromosomes involved in triggering sexual development and characterise autosomal effector genes underlying sexual differentiation.
we show that male but not female development involves largescale transcriptome reorganisation with pervasive enrichment in regulatory genes faster evolutionary rates and high species specificity of malebiased genes.
our observations imply that a femalelike phenotype is the ground state which is complemented by the presence of a uchromosome but overridden by a dominant male developmental program in the presence of a vchromosome."
"we present a highly resolved speciesrich food web including parasitic interactions for the california rocky intertidal zone.
the food web is comprised of 1809 nodes representing 1845 taxa and 13222 links representing trophic interactions between nodes.
while only 670 links represent parasitic interactions we have assembled possibly the most speciose parasiteinclusive food web ever published.
the inclusion of all nodes and links are justified using multiple lines of evidence which are built into the dataset.
in addition metadata including trophic strategy taxonomic information habitat and other ecological attributes allow the data user to filter the food web to their specifications.
the food web is a powerful and flexible tool for researchers with questions about large network properties ecological dynamics of rocky shores and the role of parasites in ecosystems.
our food web can be used to predict how complex ecosystems like the california rocky intertidal will respond to anthropogenic change and management strategies."
the low yield of sesame
"all cells are encapsulated in a lipid membrane that provides a responsive interface between life and its environment.
although simple membranes can be built from a single type of lipid cellular membranes contain 10s to 100s of unique lipid species.
deciphering the significance of lipidome complexity is a central challenge in understanding the design principles of living membranes.
while functions of individual lipids have been extensively studied understanding how lipidomes collectively contribute to membrane function and cell phenotypes is experimentally challenging in most organisms.
to address this challenge we turned to the simple pathogenic organism"
"this study advances sustainable pharmaceutical research for endometriosis by aligning with the un sustainable development goals on health gender equality and responsible consumption in developing  3d cell culture models of endometriotic pathophysiology.
fibrosis is a key aspect of endometriosis yet current models to study it remain limited especially in 3d.
this work aims to bridge the translational gap between  fibrosis research and preclinical testing of nonhormonal drug candidates.
when grown in a 3d matrix of sustainably produced silk protein functionalized with a fibronectinderived cell adhesion motif fnsilk endometrial stromal and epithelial cells respond to transforming growth factor beta1 tgfβ1 in a physiological manner as probed at the mrna level.
for stromal cells this response to tgfβ1 is not observed in spheroids while epithelial cell spheroids behave similarly to epithelial cell fnsilk networks.
pirfenidone an antifibrotic drug approved for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis reverses tgfβ1induced upregulation of mrna transcripts involved in fibroblasttomyofibroblast transdifferentiation of endometrial stromal cells in fnsilk networks supporting the drug’s potential as a repurposed nonhormonal therapy for endometriosis.
this study demonstrates how a sustainable approach – from project conceptualization to material selection – can be integrated into pharmaceutical research for women’s health."
"nonhuman animal models have demonstrated that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors ssris can enhance plasticity within the mature visual cortex and enable recovery from amblyopia.
the aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the ssri citalopram combined with parttime patching of the fellow fixing eye would improve amblyopic eye visual acuity in adult humans.
following a crossover randomized double blind placebocontrolled design preregistration actrn12611000669998 participants completed two 2week blocks of fellow fixing eye patching.
one block combined patching with citalopram 20 mgday and the other with a placebo tablet.
the blocks were separated by a 2week washout period.
the primary outcome was change in amblyopic eye visual acuity.
secondary outcomes included stereoacuity and electrophysiological measures of retinal and cortical function.
seven participants were randomized fewer than our prespecified sample size of 20. there were no statistically significant differences in amblyopic eye visual acuity change between the active mean ± sd change  0.08±0.16 logmar and the placebo mean change  −0.01±0.03 logmar blocks.
no treatment effects were observed for any secondary outcomes.
however 3 of 7 participants experienced a 0.1 logmar or greater improvement in amblyopic eye visual acuity in the active but not the placebo block.
these results from a small sample suggest that largerscale trials of ssri treatment for adult amblyopia may be warranted.
considerations for future trials include drug dose treatment duration and recruitment challenges."
" biological control is a sustainable strategy to combat agricultural pests.
yet due to legislation importing nonnative biocontrol agents is increasingly restricted.
thus selective breeding of biocontrol traits of native species is suggested to enhance performance of existing biocontrol agents.
genomic prediction is a new alternative to exploit genetic variation for improving biocontrol efficacy.
this study aims to establish proofofprinciple for genomic prediction in insect biocontrol agents using wing morphology traits in the parasitoid  walker pteromalidae as a model."
"although chemotherapy regimens are wellestablished in clinical practice chemoresistance and adverse side effects pose significant obstacles in cancer treatment.
paclitaxel ptx a widely used chemotherapeutic agent faces formulation challenges due to its poor solubility and permeability.
research suggests that the phytochemical cannabidiol cbd holds potential not only in targeting cancer cells but also in alleviating pain and nausea thereby improving the quality of life for cancer patients.
however cbds clinical application is also limited by its poor solubility low bioavailability and susceptibility to oxidation.
nanostructured lipid carriers nlcs represent a promising drug delivery system for hydrophobic compounds like ptx and cbd and allows their coencapsulation.
nonetheless achieving a stable formulation requires identifying suitable preparation methods and excipients.
the aim of this study was to develop and optimize an nlc formulation for the coencapsulation of ptx and cbd.
using factorial design an optimized formulation was obtained with homogeneous particle sizes 200 nm negative zeta potentials 17 mv particle concentration of 1013 particlesml spherical morphology tem images and a lipid core with low crystallinity as confirmed by xrd.
to evaluate the therapeutic potential of the drug combination cell viability assays were conducted on murine melanoma cells b16f10 at different exposure times 24 and 48 hours.
the nlccbdptx formulation significantly reduced cell viability in a time and concentrationdependent manner demonstrating at least 75 greater activity at 24 hours compared to each drug individually whether free ptx cbd or encapsulated nlcptx nlccbd.
this indicates a synergistic effect of the encapsulated drugs on cytotoxicity.
in conclusion an innovative pharmaceutical formulation coencapsulating ptx and cbd was validated showing potential to enhance antitumor efficacy overcome chemoresistance reduce side effects and broaden therapeutic applications.
the resulting nlcs exhibited favorable physicochemical properties supporting their suitability for various routes of administration."
"thyroid hormones the common name for prohormone thyroxine and the bioactive form triiodothyronine control major developmental and metabolic processes.
release of thyroid hormones from the thyroid gland into the bloodstream and their transport into target cells is facilitated by plasma membrane transporters of which monocarboxylate transporter mct8 and the highly homologous mct10 are most important.
patients with mct8 mutations suffer from a severe neurodevelopmental and metabolic disorder however the molecular mechanism underlying thyroid hormone transport is unknown.
using cryogenicsample electron microscopy cryoem we determined the ligandfree and thyroxinebound human mct8 structures in the outwardopen state and the thyroxinebound human mct10 in the inwardfacing state.
our structural analysis revealed a network of conserved gate residues involved in conformational changes upon thyroxine binding triggering ligand release on the opposite compartment.
we then determined the structure of a folded but inactive patientderived mct8 mutant indicating a subtle conformational change which explains its reduced transport activity.
in addition we determined the structure of mct8 bound to its inhibitor silychristin revealing an interaction with residues essential to drive transition to the inwardfacing state thereby locking the protein in the outwardfacing state.
this study provides molecular and structural insights into normal and disordered thyroid hormone transport."
"it is unknown whether withinpatient candida albicans diversity is common during bloodstream infections bsis.
we determined whole genome sequences of 10 c. albicans strains from blood cultures bcs at baseline n4 patients and during persistent bsis 3 of 4 patients.
bcs contained mixed populations of strains that differed by single nucleotide polymorphisms n4 patients chromosome chr 5 or 7 aneuploidy n2 and loss of heterozygosity n1.
chr7 trisomy tri7 strains from patient mn were attenuated for hyphal and biofilm formation in vitro compared to euploid strains due to nrg1 overexpression.
however tri7 strain m1 underwent filamentation during disseminated candidiasis dc in mice.
m1 was more fit than euploid strain m2 during dc and gastrointestinal colonizationinfection and in blood ex vivo.
m1 and m2 exhibited identical echinocandin minimum inhibitory concentrations but m2 was more tolerant to micafungin in vitro.
furthermore m2 was more competitive with m1 in mouse kidneys following micafungin treatment than it was in absence of micafungin.
tri7 strains represented 74 of patient mn’s baseline bc population but after 1d and 3d of echinocandin treatment euploid strains were 93 and 98 of the population respectively.
findings suggest that echinocandin tolerant euploid strains were a subpopulation to more virulent tri7 strains at baseline and then selected upon echinocandin exposure.
in conclusion bcs in at least some patients are comprised of diverse c. albicans populations not recognized by the clinical lab rather than single genetically and phenotypically identical strains.
clinical relevance of c. albicans diversity and antifungal tolerance merits further investigation."
this manuscript has been withdrawn owing to an author dispute.
"inducible defences in response to predation risk are a wellknown example of adaptive phenotypic plasticity.
while inducible defences have been mainly studied within a generation withingenerational plasticity there is now clear evidence that the ancestral exposure to predation risk can influence the defences expressed by the offspring even if they have not been exposed themselves transgenerational plasticity.
the molecular mechanisms allowing the transmission of environmental information across generations are still misunderstood.
in this study we combined measures of antipredator responses behavioural and morphological with transcriptomic investigations across two generations in the freshwater snail physa acuta.
we hypothesised that both within and transgenerational plasticity would induce phenotypic changes associated with differential gene expression.
our results confirmed within and transgenerational plasticity f1 snails have responded to predatorcue exposure by increasing escape behaviour reducing shell length and developing thicker and slender shells and f2 from exposed parents have shown similar responses.
within and transgenerational plasticity were accompanied by the differential expression of 78 genes 77 up and 1 downregulated and 14 differentially expressed genes 13 up and 1 downregulated respectively.
within and transgenerational plasticity did not share common differentially expressed genes but some differentially expressed genes in f1 are also highly expressed in f2 and overall the molecular functions were similar involving metabolism and transcription regulation.
the quantitatively low molecular response associated with transgenerational plasticity suggests that gene expression changes induced by parental exposure may have occurred early in development and have decreased at adult stage."
" ingestion of nanomaterials nms might impair intestinal barrier but the underlying mechanisms remain evasive and evidence is not systematically gathered or produced.
a mechanisticbased approach would be instrumental to assess if relevant nms disrupt intestinal barrier to support nm risk assessment in the food sector."
"despite decades of reports of weak magnetic field effects in biology across the tree of life and on a broad range of cell types the evidence to date remains met with skepticism.
to remedy this we present opendata large scale and varied morphological evidence that"
"the epidemiological transition from young to old deaths in highincome countries reduced mortality at all ages but a major role was played by a decline of infant and child mortality from infectious diseases that greatly increased life expectancy at birth.
over time declines in infectious disease continue but chronic and degenerative causes persist so we might expect under5 deaths to be concentrated in the first month of life.
however little is known about the agepattern of this transition in early mortality or its potential limits.
here we first describe the limit using detailed data on denmark japan france and the usa— developed countries with low under5 mortality.
the limiting pattern of under5 deaths concentrates in the first month but is surprisingly dispersed over later ages we call this the early rectangularization of mortality.
then we examine the progress towards this limit of 31 developing countries from subsaharan africa ssa—the region with the highest under5 mortality.
in these countries we find that early deaths have large ageheterogeneities and that the age patterns of death is an important marker of progress in the mortality transition at early ages.
but a negative association between national income and under5 mortality levels confirmed here does not help explain reductions in child mortality during the transition."
"  is a widespread indopacific fish that is important in aquaculture recreational and commercial fisheries.
genetic divergences from different data sources and sampling schemes  have been reported.
to conduct phylogenetic and population genetic analyses from a geographically and phylogenetically representative data set to identify hierarchical divisions within .
we further test the evolutionary significance of genetic units in terms of signatures of adaptation.
using a wholegenome sequence data set of 61 fish including an outgroup we conducted phylogenetic and population genetic analyes.
we also generated measures of fst nucleotide diversity π and tajimas d d.  we identify three main lineages of  corresponding to the indian subcontinent southeast asia and australasia.
subdivision within each of the three main lineages is also identified and characterized.
adaptively significant differences are indicated within and between the three main lineages.
exhibits genetic divergences at different levels that originate before and during the pleistocene.
these divergences are associated with adaptive divergence but unclear phenotypic changes.
this study highlights the need for comprehensive sampling and integrative study of genotypes and phenotypes across the range of ."
 is a parasitic mite species that negatively affects the health of the
"metabolic stress must be effectively mitigated for the survival of cells and organisms.
ribosomes have emerged as signaling hubs that sense metabolic perturbations and coordinate responses that either restore homeostasis or trigger cell death.
as yet the mechanisms governing these cell fate decisions are not well understood.
here we report an unexpected role for the atypical e3 ligase hoil1 in safeguarding the ribosome.
we find hoil1 mutations associated with cardiomyopathy broadly sensitize cells to nutrient and translational stress.
these signals converge on the ribotoxic stress sentinel zakα.
mechanistically mutant hoil1 excludes a ribosome quality control e3 ligase from its functional complex and remodels the ribosome ubiquitin landscape.
this quality control failure renders glucose starvation ribotoxic precipitating a zakαatf4xctdriven noncanonical cell death.
we further show hoil1 loss exacerbates cardiac dysfunction under pressure overload.
these data reveal an unrecognized ribosome signaling axis and a molecular circuit controlling cell fate during nutrient stress."
" none.
no competing interests."
"wild birds serve as reservoirs and vectors for many different pathogens and changes in their distribution and abundance due to environmental change will influence disease risk.
we study three species which are highly abundant in northwestern europe and which can transmit a wide range of diseases including avian influenza and west nile virus blackbirds mallards and house sparrows.
using the netherlands as a case study we created random forest models for predicting the distribution and abundance of these species both now and in the future.
climate land use and vegetative cover were all important predictors of bird abundance.
the three species had different spatial distributions largely related to their preferred habitat and food availability.
in the future mallard and house sparrow populations were predicted to increase while there was little change for blackbirds.
quantifying the consequences of these abundance changes is complicated as there are many factors to consider however increased pathogen reservoirs will likely increase disease risk and changes in distribution may affect local outbreak risk.
the future abundance maps created in this study and the methods used to create them will be useful tools for disease modellers and policymakers to estimate future disease risk and to plan accordingly."
"the point mutation n642h of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b stat5b protein is associated with aggressive and drugresistant forms of leukemia.
this mutation is thought to promote cancer due to hyperactivation of stat5b caused by increased stability of the active parallel dimer state.
however the molecular mechanism leading to this stabilization is not well understood as there is currently no structure of the parallel dimer.
to investigate the mutations mechanism of action we conducted extensive allatom molecular dynamics simulations of multiple oligomeric forms of both stat5b and stat5bn642h including a model for the parallel dimer.
the n642h mutation directly affects the hydrogen bonding network within the phosphotyrosine pybinding pocket of the parallel dimer enhancing the pybinding interaction.
the simulations indicate that apo stat5b is highly flexible exploring a diverse conformational space.
in contrast apo stat5bn642h accesses two distinct conformational states one of which resembles the conformation of the parallel dimer.
the simulation predictions of the effects of the mutation on structure and dynamics are supported by the results of hydrogendeuterium exchange hdx mass spectrometry measurements carried out on stat5b and stat5bn642h in which a phosphopeptide was used to mimic the effects of parallel dimerization on the sh2 domain.
the molecularlevel information uncovered in this work contributes to our understanding of stat5b hyperactivation by the n642h mutation and could help pave the way for novel therapeutic strategies targeting this mutation."
"altered patterns of visual social attention preference detected using eyetracking and a variety of different paradigms are increasingly proposed as sensitive biomarkers for autism spectrum disorder.
however few eye tracking studies have compared the relative efficacy of different paradigms to discriminate between autistic compared with typically developing children and their sensitivity to specific symptoms.
to target this issue the current study used three common eye tracking protocols contrasting social versus nonsocial stimuli in young 27 years old chinese autistic n  35 and typically developing n  34 children matched for age and gender.
protocols included dancing people .
dynamic geometrical images biological motion dynamic light point walking human or cat .
nonbiological motion scrambled controls and child playing with toy .
toy alone.
although all three paradigms differentiated autistic and typically developing children the dancing people versus dynamic geometry pattern paradigm was the most effective with autistic children showing marked reductions in visual preference for dancing people and correspondingly increased one for geometric patterns.
furthermore this altered visual preference in autistic children was correlated with the ados social affect score and had the highest discrimination accuracy.
our results therefore indicate that decreased visual preference for dynamic social stimuli may be the most effective visual attentionbased paradigm for use as a biomarker for autism in chinese children.
clinical trial id  clinicaltrials.gov clinical trial name development of eyetracking based markers for autism in young children."
" adoption of a plantbased diet is a popular lifestyle choice for many owners of canine companion animals.
increasingly owners would like to feed their canine companions a similar diet.
a plantbased dietary pattern has been reported to be associated with some micronutrient deficiencies.
complete dog foods are by definition supposed to be nutritionally replete in all macro and micronutrients.
few studies have reported a full nutritional analysis of complete dry plantversus meatbased dog foods."
"despite the high burden of vectorborne disease in subtropical areas few information are available regarding the diversity of tick and tickborne pathogens circulating in the caribbean.
management and control of vectorborne disease require actual epidemiological data to better assess and anticipate the risk of reemergence of tickborne diseases in the region.
to simplify and reduce the costs of such largescale surveys we implemented a highthroughput microfluidic realtime pcr system suitable for the screening of the main bacterial and parasitic genera involved in tickborne disease and potentially circulating in the area.
we used the new screening tool to perform an exploratory epidemiological study on 132 specimens of  and 446 of  collected in guadeloupe and martinique.
not only the system was able to detect the main pathogens of the area–     – but the system also provided evidence of unsuspected microorganisms in caribbean ticks belonging to the    and"
"the authors have withdrawn this manuscript because they intend to revise this version of preprint substantially in response to comments received from the reviewers and other peers on some analytical parts along with the interpretation of corresponding results in order to make a fresh submission to an impacted reputed journal.
therefore the authors do not wish this work to be cited as reference for the project.
if you have any questions please contact the corresponding author."
"selection against deleterious mutations called purifying selection plays a central role in evolution and acts in all populations.
it is known that the genetic patterns observed in genomic regions undergoing purifying selection differ from those resulting from neutral evolution.
however a comprehensive understanding of the underlying mechanisms shaping those patterns is still lacking.
in the present work we use simulations combined with a genealogical approach to identify the effect of purifying selection on the ancestry and thus on the genetic diversity.
our analysis relies on the postulate that the genealogy belongs to the universality class of betacoalescents.
under this assumption we derive statistics measuring the distortion of the genealogy.
this approach allows us to consider a wide range of regimes i.e.
arbitrary selection and mutation strengths and uncover a rich phase diagram.
we find that for strong selection the limiting genealogy is given by kingmans coalescent on a polynomial timescale.
as selection gets weaker mullers ratchet starts operating setting off the emergence of multiple mergers in the genealogical structures.
our results show that while multiplemerger coalescents are often interpreted as the signature of selective sweeps in rapidly adapting populations these structures can also appear in the context of mullers ratchet."
"cellular senescence is a phenotypic state that contributes to the progression of agerelated disease through secretion of proinflammatory factors known as the senescence associated secretory phenotype sasp.
understanding the process by which healthy cells become senescent and develop sasp factors is critical for improving the identification of senescent cells and ultimately understanding tissue dysfunction.
here we reveal how the duration of cellular stress modulates the sasp in distinct subpopulations of senescent cells.
we used multiplex singlecell imaging to build a proteomic map of senescence induction in human epithelial cells induced to senescence over the course of 31 days.
we map how the expression of sasp proteins increases alongside other known senescence markers such as p53 p21 and p16ink4a.
the aggregated population of cells responded to etoposide with an accumulation of stress response factors over the first 11 days followed by a plateau in most proteins.
at the singlecell level however we identified two distinct senescence cell populations one defined primarily by larger nuclear area and the second by higher protein concentrations.
trajectory inference suggested that cells took one of two discrete molecular paths from unperturbed healthy cells through a common transitional subpopulation and ending at the discrete terminal senescence phenotypes.
our results underscore the importance of using singlecell proteomics to identify the mechanistic pathways governing the transition from senescence induction to a mature state of senescence characterized by the sasp."
"a human group shares a common goal and distributes roles to implement activities that are difficult to accomplish alone and higher performance than an individual.
in such coordination nonverbal behavior among three or more members makes it difficult to explain the mechanism because of complex and dynamic interactions.
in cognitive science a crucial role is indicated which intervenes moderately with others and adjusts the whole balance without interrupting their main smooth interactions using an experimental task.
it suggests that the third role and related playing supports to coordination.
this is similar to offball movements in team sports which are not involved directly with the ball and are focused on mainly in sports science because common statistical data do not reflect.
a new perspective for discussing coordination has arisen because existing theories such as synchronization cannot explain the mentioned role however there is room for its usefulness.
therefore this study applied the experimental findings to the sports field.
we designed a 3on3 basketball game in which the relevant offensive role is key and introduced it to the practice of the university team as a pilot study.
participants repeatedly engaged in the minigame and the playing on the offensive team was compared before and after receiving tips on this role.
consequently in the bins of the relatively large distance between the participant required in this role and each defensive player the frequencies after the tips were significantly higher and the winning rate on the offensive team improved temporarily.
it suggests that the spacing skill which indicates a reasonable distance for intervening with the other offensive players emerged.
this study may provide findings that satisfy usefulness and ecological validity and make an educational contribution about giving the tips of offball movements."
"the mapping and introduction of sustainable plant immunity to pests and diseases in fruit tree is still a major challenge in modern breeding.
this study aims at deciphering the genetic architecture underlying resistance or tolerance across environments for major pests and diseases in peach p. persica and apricot p. armeniaca.
we set up a multienvironment trial met approach by studying two core collections of 206 peach and 150 apricot accessions deployed under low phytosanitary conditions in respectively three and two environmentally contrasted locations in southeast of france.
to capture the complex dynamics of pest and disease spread in naturally infected orchards visual scoring of symptoms was repeated within and between 3 years for five and two pests and diseases respectively for peach and apricot resulting in the maximum of damage score and the audpc.
these traits were used as phenotypic inputs in our genomewide association studies gwas strategy and leading to the identification of i nonadditive genotype–phenotype associations ii environmentshared qtls iii environmentspecific qtls and iv interactive qtls which changes in direction antagonist or intensity differential according to the environment.
by conducting gwas with multiple methods we successfully identified a total of 60 high confidence qtls leading to the identification of 87 candidate genes the majority belonging to the leucinerich repeat containing receptors lrrcrs family gene.
finally we provided a comparative analysis of our results on peach and apricot two closely related species.
the present results contribute to the development of genomics–assisted breeding to improve biotic resilience in prunus varieties."
 formerly at patch biosciences
"understanding deaths and lifedeath boundaries of cells is a fundamental challenge in biological sciences.
in this study we present a theoretical framework for investigating cell death.
we conceptualize cell death as a controllability problem within dynamical systems and compute the lifedeath boundary through the development of “stoichiometric rays”.
this method utilizes enzyme activity as control parameters exploiting the inherent property of enzymes to enhance reaction rates without affecting thermodynamic potentials.
this approach facilitates the efficient evaluation of the global controllability of models.
we demonstrate the utility of our framework using its application to a toy metabolic model where we delineate the lifedeath boundary.
the formulation of cell death through mathematical principles provides a foundation for the theoretical study of cellular mortality."
"ash dieback adb caused by the invasive alien fungal pathogen hymenoscyphus fraxineus is an emerging disease that poses major threats to the survival of common ash fraxinus excelsior in europe.
here we report on a field trial aiming at the identification of adb tolerant genotypes while encompassing the genetic diversity of common ash in austria.
over 35000 progenies from more than 600 putative tolerant mother trees were assessed for adb symptoms over a period of three years.
one tolerant and one susceptible progeny from a subset of the mother tree range 570 trees were genotyped using the 4tree array a genotyping tool developed specifically to screen common ash provenances for their tolerance to ash dieback.
we aimed to 1 better characterize the genetic structure of common ash in austria 2 identify hybrids between common ash and f. angustifolia narrowleaved ash 3 detect genetic loci associated with tolerance to adb and 4 identify genetic variation associated with abiotic factors such as temperature and precipitation influencing the severity of adb.
we identify ash individuals from eastern austria matching putative hybrids with f. angustifolia showing varying degrees of f. angustifolia ancestry in structure analyses.
the nonhybrid gene pool is characterized by shallow genetic structure following a west to east geographic pattern.
in contrast to our expectations genotypedamage association analyses overall fail to detect snps associated with tolerance to adb.
our findings underscore that the polygenic architecture governing tolerance and the rapid decay of genomic linkage disequilibrium ld within approximately 10 kb significantly limit the ability to identify association outliers using the 4tree snp array.
this highlights the constrained utility of chip genotyping approaches for this specific purpose.
in contrast the array proves successful in detecting hybrids between common ash and narrowleaved ash as well as outlier snps associated with abiotic predictors such as annual precipitation and temperature known to influence the severity of adb damage."
"mapping a protein sequence to its underlying biological function is a critical problem of increasing importance in biology.
in this work we propose protex a retrievalaugmented approach for protein function prediction that leverages exemplars from a database to improve accuracy and robustness and enable generalization to unseen classes.
our approach relies on a novel multisequence pretraining task and a finetuning strategy that effectively conditions predictions on retrieved exemplars.
our method achieves stateoftheart results across multiple datasets and settings for predicting enzyme commission ec numbers gene ontology go terms and pfam families.
our ablations and analysis highlight the impact of conditioning predictions on exemplar sequences especially for classes and sequences less well represented in the training data."
"the extravasation of polymorphonuclear neutrophils pmns is a critical component of the innate immune response that involves transendothelial migration tem and interstitial migration.
temmediated interactions between pmns and vascular endothelial cells vecs trigger a cascade of biochemical and mechanobiological signals whose effects on interstitial migration are currently unclear.
to address this question we cultured human vecs on a fibronectintreated transwell insert to model the endothelium and basement membrane loaded pmnlike differentiated hl60 dhl60 cells in the upper chamber of the insert and collected the pmns that crossed the membranesupported monolayer from the lower chamber.
the 3d chemotactic migration of the temconditioned pmns through collagen matrices was then quantified.
data collected from over 50000 trajectories showed two distinct migratory phenotypes i.e.
a highpersistence phenotype and a lowpersistence phenotype.
these phenotypes were conserved across treatment conditions and their existence was confirmed in human primary pmns.
the highpersistence phenotype was characterized by more straight trajectories and faster migration speeds whereas the lowpersistence one exhibited more frequent sharp turns and loitering periods.
a key finding of our study is that tem induced a phenotypic shift in pmns from highpersistence migration to lowpersistence migration.
changes in the relative proportion of highpersistence and lowpersistence populations correlated with grk2 expression levels.
inhibiting grk2 hindered the teminduced shift in migratory phenotype and impaired the phagocytic function of pmns.
overall our study suggests that temmediated grk2 signaling primes pmns for a migration phenotype better suited for spatial exploration and inflammation resolution.
these observations provide novel insight into the biophysical impacts of tem that priming pmns is essential to conduct sentinel functions."
"research on the understudied solute carrier slc superfamily of membrane transporters would greatly profit from a comprehensive knowledgebase synthesizing data and knowledge on different aspects of slc function.
we consolidated multiomics data sets with selected curated information from the public domain such as structure prediction substrate annotation disease association and subcellular localization.
this slccentric knowledge is made accessible to the scientific community via a web portal featuring interactive dashboards and a tool for familywide treebased visualization of slc properties.
making use of the systematically collected and curated data sets we selected eight featuredimensions to compute an integrated functional landscape of human slcs.
this landscape represents various functional aspects harmonizing local and global features of the underlying data sets as demonstrated by inspecting structural folds and subcellular locations of selected transporters.
based on all available data sets and their integration we assigned a biochemicalbiological function to each slc making it one of the largest systematic annotations of human gene function and likely acting as a blueprint for future endeavours."
""
"the transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic gene expression is a critical aspect with transcription factors playing a key role by combining with cisacting elements in the promoter regions.
growth regulating factors grfs are plantspecific transcriptional factors.
the  growthregulating factor gene  when ectopically expressed in crops such as  sugar beet and  canola has an effect of accelerating shoot organogenesis and enhancing the efficiency of genetic transformation.
however an efficient plant regeneration and genetic transformation system in  l. ssp.
a major vegetable crop in china remains to be established.
in this work we identified and characterized the  ortholog in  named as  from brad database.
molecular analysis of  gene and exploration of its protein interaction network were further conducted.
therefore the promoter region of  was thoroughly examined to determine cisacting elements of various kinds and quantities.
it is expected to provide a foundation for regulation of  and a informative reference for the improvement of  transformation efficiency and molecular breeding.
keywords  l. ssp.
molecular characterization promoter"
"p21 activated kinases paks are involved in a wide range of functions from the regulation of the cytoskeleton to the control of apoptosis and proliferation.
although many pak substrates identified are implicated in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton a coherent picture of the total effect of pak activation on the state of the actin cytoskeleton is unclear.
we therefore set out to observe and quantify the effect of pak inhibition on the actin cytoskeleton in greater detail.
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts inhibition of pak kinase activity either by treatment with small molecule inhibitors or overexpression of mutant pak constructs leads to the constitutive production of patches of the phosphoinositide pip3 on the ventral surface of the cell.
the formation of these patches remodels the actin cytoskeleton and polarises the cell.
from the overexpression of truncated and mutant pak constructs as well as an in vitro model of pak recruitment to small gtpases we propose that this is due to a hyper recruitment of pak and pak binding partners in the absence of pak kinase activity.
this aberrant production of pip3 suggests that the kinase activity of class i paks acts to downregulate pi3k activity further highlighting class i paks as regulators of pi3k activity and therefore the excitability of the actin cytoskeleton."
"pigs are crucial sources of meat and protein valuable animal models and potential donors for xenotransplantation.
however the existing reference genome for pigs is incomplete with thousands of segments and missing centromeres and telomeres which limits our understanding of the important traits in these genomic regions.
to address this issue we present a near complete genome assembly for the jinhua pig jht2t constructed using pacbio hifi and ont long reads.
this assembly includes all 18 autosomes and the x and y sex chromosomes with only six gaps.
it features annotations of 46.90 repetitive sequences 35 telomeres 17 centromeres and 23924 highconfident genes.
compared to the sscrofa11.1 jht2t closes nearly all gaps extends sequences by 177 mb predicts more intact telomeres and centromeres and gains 799 more genes and loses 114 genes.
moreover it enhances the mapping rate for both western and chinese local pigs outperforming sscrofa11.1 as a reference genome.
additionally this comprehensive genome assembly will facilitate largescale variant detection and enable the exploration of genes associated with pig domestication such as gpam cyp2c18 ly9 itln2 and chia.
our findings represent a significant advancement in pig genomics providing a robust resource that enhances genetic research breeding programs and biomedical applications."
"interactions between plant pathogens and their hosts are highly dynamic and mainly driven by pathogen effectors and plant receptors.
hostpathogen coevolution can cause rapid diversification or loss of pathogen genes encoding hostexposed proteins.
the molecular mechanisms that underpin such sequence dynamics remains poorly investigated at the scale of entire pathogen species.
here we focus on avrstb6 a major effector of the global wheat pathogen"
"harsh environments such as those with breaking waves and turbulent flows present extreme challenges to organismal survival.
many animals exploiting these habitats possess adaptations to maintain position under dynamic flow conditions such as reversible or permanent attachment systems.
however some stationholding fishes e.g.
sculpins instead rely on morphological and behavioral modifications of their pectoral fins to increase friction with the substrate and combat drag.
despite epidermal microstructures on the fins of other benthic fishes little exploration of pectoral fin surfaces at the microscopic scale has been undertaken in sculpins.
using scanning electron microscopy we discovered microscopic fibrillar projections contained within single cells on the ventral surfaces of the paired fin rays of two intertidal and two subtidal species of marine sculpins.
in contrast to subtidal species the intertidal species possessed epidermal cells with discrete channels separating groups of fibrillar projections.
these features bear a striking resemblance to epidermal microstructures described in other fishes but have distinct morphological differences.
we posit that these previously overlooked features likely contribute to sculpin stationholding performance via enhanced mechanical interactions with the substrate suggesting new taxa within which to examine mechanisms of underwater friction enhancement and adhesion."
"the react recovery activity project is an enfsi european network of forensic science institutes supported initiative comprising a large consortium of laboratories.
here the results from more than 23 laboratories are presented.
the primary purpose was to design experiments simulating typical casework circumstances collect data and to implement bayesian networks to assess the value i.e.
likelihood ratio of dna results given activity level propositions.
two different experimental designs were used to simulate a robbery where a screwdriver was used to force a door or window.
propositions and case information were chosen following laboratory feedback listing typical casework circumstances included in the paper.
whereas the proposition representing prosecution’s view is applicable to many cases the defendant forced the doorwindow with his screwdriver the proposition representing defence’s view are more variable depending on what is alleged to have happened.
in a direct transfer experiment the defendant owned and used the screwdriver but he did not force the doorwindow in question.
an unknown person used the defendant’s stolen screwdriver.
in an indirect transfer experiment the defendant neither owned saw nor used the screwdriver nor did they force the door or window.
instead an unknown individual—someone with whom the defendant had interacted e.g.
by shaking hands or touching the same objects—used the recovered tool to force entry.
in the first experiment if the defendant forced the doorwindow then she is the last handler of the screw driver whereas if the tool was stolen and used by an unknown person the defendant is the first handler.
for the second experiment given the defence view the defendant never held the screwdriver.
we envisaged the situation where an object manipulated by the defendant or the defendant himselfherself would be touched by the unknown offender who would then force the window.
the time delay between the touching of the object and the forcing of the window was 0 1h and 2h.
this was accomplished by handshaking experiments where the person forcing the door would shake a person’s hand and then use the screwdriver either immediately after handshake or after 1 2 hours.
it was found for the direct transfer experiment that unless a single contributor profile aligning with the known person’s of interest profile was retrieved the results did not allow to discriminate propositions.
on the other hand for the indirect transfer experiment both single and major contributor profiles that aligned with the person of interest poi supported the proposition that the person used the tool rather than an unknown person who had touched an object when indeed the former was true.
there was considerable variation in median recoveries of dna between laboratories between 200pg  5ng for a given experiment if quantities are taken into account.
these differences affect the likelihood ratios given activity level propositions.
more than 2700 samples were analysed in the course of this study.
two different bayesian networks are made available via an open source application written in shiny r shinyreact.
for comparison all datasets were analysed using a qualitative method categorised into absent single balanced or major given contributors."
"population cycles are prevalent in ecosystems and play key roles in determining their functions.
while multiple mechanisms have been theoretically shown to generate population cycles there are limited examples of mutualisms driving selfsustained oscillations.
using an engineered microbial community that crossfeeds essential amino acids we experimentally demonstrate cycles in strain abundance that are robust across environmental conditions.
a nonlinear dynamical model that incorporates the experimentally observed crossinhibition of amino acid production recapitulates the population cycles.
the model shows that the cycles represent internally generated relaxation oscillations which emerge when fast resource dynamics with positive feedback drive slow changes in strain abundance.
our findings highlight the critical role of resource dynamics and feedback in shaping population cycles in microbial communities and have implications for biotechnology."
"plant phenology plays a fundamental role in shaping ecosystems and global changeinduced shifts in phenology have cascading impacts on species interactions and ecosystem structure and function.
detailed highquality observations of when plants undergo seasonal transitions such as leafout flowering and fruiting are critical for tracking causes and consequences of phenology shifts but these data are often sparse and biased globally.
these data gaps limit broader generalizations and forecasting improvements in the face of continuing disturbance.
one solution to closing such gaps is to document phenology on field images taken by public participants.
inaturalist in particular provides global scale researchgrade data and is expanding rapidly.
here we utilize over 53 million field images of plants and millions of human annotations from inaturalist – data spanning all angiosperms and drawn from across the globe – to train a computer vision model phenovision to detect the presence of fruits and flowers.
phenovision utilizes a vision transformer architecture pretrained with a masked autoencoder to improve classification success and it achieves high accuracy for flower 98.5 and fruit presence 95. key to producing researchready phenology data is postcalibration tuning and validation focused on reducing noise inherent in field photographs and maximizing the true positive rate.
we also develop a standardized set of quality metrics and metadata so that results can be used effectively by the community.
finally we showcase how this effort vastly increases phenology data coverage including regions of the globe where data have been limited before.
our end products are tuned models new data resources and an application streamlining discovery and use of those data for the broader research and management community.
we close by discussing next steps including automating phenology annotations adding new phenology targets e.g.
leaf phenology and further integration with other resources to form a global central database integrating all insitu plant phenology resources."
"peptides are widely used in biomaterials due to their easy of synthesis ability to signal cells and modify the properties of biomaterials.
a key benefit of using peptides is that they are natural substrates for cellsecreted enzymes which creates the possibility of utilizing cellsecreted enzymes for tuning cellmaterial interactions.
however these enzymes can also induce unwanted degradation of bioactive peptides in biomaterials or in peptide therapies.
liquid chromatographymass spectrometry lcms is a widely used powerful methodology that can separate complex mixtures of molecules and quantify numerous analytes within a single run.
there are several challenges in using lcms for the multiplexed quantification of cellinduced peptide degradation including the need for nondegradable internal standards and the identification of optimal sample storage conditions.
another problem is that cell culture media and biological samples typically contain both proteins and lipids that can accumulate on chromatography columns and degrade their performance.
however removing these constituents can be expensive time consuming and increases sample variability.
here we show that directly injecting samples onto the lcms without any purification enables rapid and accurate quantification of peptide concentration and that hundreds of lcms runs can be done on a single column without a significantly diminish the ability to quantify the degradation of peptide libraries.
we also show that column failure is evident when hydrophilic peptides fail to be retained on the column and this can be easily identified using standard peptide mixtures for column benchmarking.
in total this work introduces a simple and effective method for simultaneously quantifying the degradation of dozens of peptides in cell culture.
by providing a streamlined and costeffective method for the direct quantification of peptide degradation in complex biological samples this work enables more efficient assessment of peptide stability and functionality facilitating the development of advanced biomaterials and peptidebased therapies."
"antibodies are indispensable in laboratory and clinical applications due to their high specificity and affinity for protein antigens.
however selecting the right protein fragments as immunogens for antibody production remains challenging.
leveraging the human protein atlas this study systematically evaluates immunogen properties aiming to identify key factors that influence their suitability.
antibodies were classified as successful or unsuccessful based on standardized validation experiments and the structural and functional properties of their immunogens were analysed.
results indicated that longer immunogens often resulted in more successful but less specific antibodies.
shorter immunogens 50 residues or fewer with disordered or unfolded regions at the n or cterminus and long coil stretches were more likely to generate successful antibodies.
conversely immunogens with high beta sheet content multiple secondary structure elements transmembrane regions or disulfide bridges were associated with poorer antibody performance.
posttranslational modification sites within immunogens appeared to mark beneficial regions for antibody generation.
to support antibody selection a novel r package immunogenviewer was developed enabling researchers to easily apply these insights when immunogen sequences are disclosed.
by providing a deeper understanding of immunogen suitability this study promotes the development of more effective antibodies ultimately addressing issues of reproducibility and reliability in antibodybased research.
the findings are highly relevant to the research community as endusers often lack control over the immunogen selection process in antibody production."
"the gle1 protein is an enigmatic factor of rna processing associated with multiple developmental disorders including lethal congenital contracture syndrome 1 lccs1.
using  genetic engineering to study disturbed gle1 functions under physiological conditions we demonstrate that inactivation of  impedes cellular function and organization and causes pregastrulation lethality due to defects in adhesion and lineage specification.
in contrast the knockin mice genocopying lccs1associated  variant  survive prenatal period but die suddenly at midadulthood.
mice present irregular count and distribution of spinal motor neurons and impaired development of neural crestderived tissues as demonstrated by defects in their sympathetic innervation of heart ventricles paravertebral sympathetic ganglia volume and adrenal chromaffin cell counts.
unlike previously reported for yeast and hela cells analysis of molecular consequences of  variant identified normal polya rna distribution in  cells which however were impaired in rna and protein synthesis and simultaneously showed typical signs of cellular senescence.
also induced disturbed stress responses with significant changes in g3bp1positive stress granule count.
our results show necessity of gle1 functions for life and indicate that lccs1 etiology is resultant of pathogenic  variant impinging differentiation of neural crest derivatives and leading to complex multiorgan defects."
"chronic unresolved inflammation has long been speculated to serve as an initiating and propagating factor in numerous neurodegenerative diseases including a leading cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly agerelated macular degeneration amd.
intracellular multiprotein complexes called inflammasomes in combination with activated caspases facilitate production of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1 beta.
specifically the nucleotidebinding oligomerization nodlike receptor protein 3 nlrp3 has received heightened attention due to the wide range of stimuli to which it can respond and its potential involvement in amd.
in this study we directly tested the role of nlrp3 and its downstream effector caspase 1 casp1 in mediating early amdlike pathology i.e.
basal laminar deposits blamds in wildtype wt mice and the malattia leventinesedoyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy mldhrd mouse model p.r345w mutation in efemp1.
compared to agedmatched controls r345w knockin mice demonstrated increased muller cell gliosis subretinal iba1 microglial cells higher nlrp3 immunoreactivity in the retina as well as significant transcriptional upregulation of complement component 3 nlrp3 proil1b procaspase1 and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 3 in the retinal pigmented epithelium rpechoroid.
these findings were accompanied by an agerelated increase in blamd formation in the r345w mice.
genetic elimination of either nlrp3 or casp1 significantly reduced both the size and coverage of blamds in the r345w background highlighting an important and underappreciated pathway that could affect mldhrd onset and progression.
moreover nlrp3 knockout reduced spontaneous idiopathic blamds in wt mice suggesting translatability of our findings not only to rare inherited retinal dystrophies but also potentially to amd itself."
"mtor plays a crucial role in pi3kaktmtor signaling.
we hypothesized that mtor activation mechanisms driving oncogenesis can advise effective therapeutic designs.
to test this we combined cancer genomic analysis with extensive molecular dynamics simulations of mtor oncogenic variants.
we observed that conformational changes within mtor kinase domain are associated with multiple mutational activation events.
the mutations disturb the αpacking formed by the kαal kα3 kα9 kα9b and kα10 helices in the kinase domain creating cryptic pocket.
its opening correlates with opening of the catalytic cleft including active site residues realignment favoring catalysis.
the cryptic pocket created by disrupted αpacking coincides with the allosteric pocket in pi3kα can be harmoniously fitted by the pi3kα allosteric inhibitor rly2608 suggesting that analogous drugs designed based on rly2608 can restore the packed αstructure resulting in mtor inactive conformation.
our results exemplify that knowledge of detailed kinase activation mechanisms can inform innovative allosteric inhibitor development."
formatted to plant cell
"toxicokinetic models for predicting contents of nanomaterials and other toxic chemicals are often fitted without evaluation of the residual variance structure.
the aim of the present study was to evaluate various residual variance structures assuming either homoscedasticity or heteroscedasticity when fitting nonlinear toxicokinetic onecompartment models for predicting uptake bioaccumulation and elimination of chemicals in invertebrate organisms.
data describing the exposure of several aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates to specific metal nanomaterials and other chemicals were available from real experiments for evaluating the residual variance functions for toxicokinetic models.
as proof of concept datasets of truly homoscedastic and heteroscedastic nature were simulated.
depending the dataset applying models with different residuals variance assumption largely affected the residual plots and the error margins of parameters or the predicted content of a chemical.
consequently selecting the most accurate residual variance functions for toxicokinetic modeling either homoscedastic or heteroscedastic improves the prediction of chemical contents in invertebrate organisms and the estimation of the associated uptake and elimination rates."
"light exposure at night can suppress melatonin production and increase alertness primarily through the action of melanopsincontaining intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells iprgcs.
this study investigated whether cone photoreceptors also influence melatonin suppression and subjective alertness using nonvisual metameric light emitted from a display.
fortyeight participants with normal trichromatic vision were exposed to three lighting conditions a baseline 9 lx constant background 149 lx and conemodulated flickering light targeting different cone combinations and postreceptoral channels 149 lx for 2 hours after their habitual bedtime.
salivary melatonin levels and subjective alertness were measured throughout a 9h protocol.
bayesian analysis showed that conemodulated flickering light did not significantly affect melatonin suppression or alertness providing evidence against the hypothesis that cone photoreceptors contribute to these nonvisual effects of light.
in conclusion our results suggest cone photoreceptors do not play a measurable role in light’s effects on melatonin suppression and subjective alertness at night."
"damage to the plasma membrane pm is common in all types of cells.
pm repair processes including exocytosis and endocytosis are not mutually exclusive rather they collaborate to repair the wound.
however the temporal coordination between the repair processes remains poorly understood.
here by comprehensively identifying pm repair proteins we resolved the temporal pm repair processes at the damage site in saccharomyces cerevisiae.
of the 80 repair proteins identified 72 proteins were previously unreported repair protein candidates.
we showed that polarity establishment polarized exocytosis and clathrinmediated endocytosis cme occur in a specific temporal order at the damage site.
furthermore we showed that polarized exocytosis and cme are coupled at the damage site delivering pm repair proteins with transmembrane domains between the growing bud site and the damage site.
this study provides insights into the temporal dynamics of coordinated cellular response to pm damage."
"glioblastoma gbm is the most lethal primary brain neoplasm due to its highly immunosuppressive microenvironment and resistance to conventional therapies.
to overcome this challenge we engineered a replicating retrovirus rrv to deliver a superagonist interleukin15 receptorlinked fusion protein rli directly to tumor cells engineering them into local immunotherapy biofactories.
this strategy leverages the tumorselective replication of rrv to achieve localized and sustained rli expression within the tumor microenvironment.
in two orthotopic poorly immunogenic gbm mouse models intratumoral administration of rrv rli significantly reduced tumor growth and prolonged survival compared to controls with some mice achieving longterm remission and demonstrating immunological memory upon rechallenge.
transcriptomic and flow cytometric analyses revealed that rrv rli treatment enhanced infiltration and activation of cd8⁺ t cells and nk cells and upregulated antigen presentation pathways within the tumor microenvironment.
depletion studies indicated that the therapeutic efficacy of rrv rli is dependent on both cd4⁺ and cd8⁺ t cells.
notably combining rrv rli with the gbm standard of care chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide synergistically improved survival outcomes.
subsequent singlecell rna and tcell receptor sequencing identified enhanced effector cell activation antigen presentation and clonal tcell expansion in the combination therapy group.
our findings suggest that rrvmediated delivery of rli effectively transforms gbm tumors into immunostimulatory hubs eliciting potent antitumor immune responses.
this novel viral immunotherapy holds significant promise for clinical translation in the treatment of gbm and other difficulttotreat solid tumors."
"current methods for inferring historical population sizes from dna sequences often impose a heavy computational burden or relieve that burden by imposing a fixed parametric form.
in addition they can be marred by sequencing errors or uncertainty about recombination rates and the quality of inference is often poor in the recent past.
we propose inferno for flexible nonparametric inference of effective population sizes.
it requires modest computing resources and little prior knowledge of the recombination and mutation maps and is robust to sequencing error and gene conversion.
we illustrate the statistical and computational advantages of inferno over previous approaches using a range of simulation scenarios.
in particular we demonstrate the ability of inferno to exploit biobankscale datasets for accurate inference of rapid population size changes in the recent past.
we also apply inferno to worldwide human data finding remarkable similarities in inferences from different populations in the same region.
unlike previous studies we show two historic bottlenecks for most of the nonafrican populations."
"ikarugamycin is a member of the natural product family of the polycyclic tetramate macrolactams potems.
the compound exhibits a diverse range of biological activities including antimicrobial antiprotozoal antileukemic and antiinflammatory properties.
in addition it interferes with several crucial cellular functions such as oxidized lowdensity lipoprotein uptake in macrophages nefinduced cd4 cell surface downregulation and mechanisms of endocytosis.
it is therefore used as a tool compound to study diverse biological processes.
however ikarugamycin commercial prices are very high with up to 1300 € per 1 mg thus limiting its application.
we therefore set out to develop a highyielding recombinant production platform of ikarugamycin by screening different expression vectors recombinant host strains and cultivation conditions.
overall this has led to overproduction levels of more than 100 mgl which together with a straightforward purification protocol establishes biotechnological access to affordable ikarugamycin enabling its increased use in biomedical research in the future."
"antihiv envelope broadly neutralizing antibodies bnabs are alternatives to conventional antiretrovirals with the potential to prevent and treat infection reduce latent reservoirs andor mediate a functional cure.
clinical trials with first generation bnabs used alone or in combination show promising antiviral effects but also highlight that additional engineering of enhanced antibodies will be required for optimal clinical utility while preserving or enhancing cgmp manufacturing capability.
here we report the engineering of an anticd4 bindingsite cd4bs bnab n49p9.3 purified from the plasma of an hiv eliteneutralizer.
through a series of rational modifications we produced a variant that demonstrates enhanced potency superior antiviral activity in combination with other bnabs low polyreactivity and longer circulating halflife.
additional engineering for manufacturing produced a final variant en49p9 with properties conducive to cgmp production.
overall these efforts demonstrate the feasibility of developing enhanced anticd4bs bnabs with greatly improved antiviral properties as well as potential translational value."
"the majority of highly polymorphic genes are related to immune functions and with over 100 alleles within a population genes of the major histocompatibility complex mhc are the most polymorphic loci in vertebrates.
how such extraordinary polymorphism arose and is maintained is controversial.
one possibility is heterozygote advantage ha which can in principle maintain any number of alleles but biologically explicit models based on this mechanism have so far failed to reliably predict the coexistence of significantly more than ten alleles.
we here present an ecoevolutionary model showing that evolution can result in the emergence and maintenance of more than 100 alleles under ha if the following two assumptions are fulfilled first pathogens are lethal in the absence of an appropriate immune defence second the effect of pathogens depends on host condition with hosts in poorer condition being affected more strongly.
thus our results show that ha can be a more potent force in explaining the extraordinary polymorphism found at mhc loci than currently recognized."
"singlecell rnaseq characterizes biological samples at unprecedented scale and detail but data interpretation remains challenging.
here we introduce cellwhisperer a multimodal machine learning model and software that connects transcriptomes and text for interactive singlecell rnaseq data analysis.
cellwhisperer enables the chatbased interrogation of transcriptome data in english language.
to train our model we created an aicurated dataset with over a million pairs of rnaseq profiles and matched textual annotations across a broad range of human biology and we established a multimodal embedding of matched transcriptomes and text using contrastive learning.
our model enables freetext search and annotation of transcriptome datasets by cell types states and other properties in a zeroshot manner and without the need for reference datasets.
moreover cellwhisperer answers questions about cells and genes in naturallanguage chats using a biologically fluent large language model that we finetuned to analyze bulk and singlecell transcriptome data across various biological applications.
we integrated cellwhisperer with the widely used cellxgene browser allowing users to interactively explore rnaseq data through an integrated graphical and chat interface.
our method demonstrates a new way of working with transcriptome data leveraging the power of natural language for singlecell data analysis and establishing an important building block for future aibased bioinformatics research assistants."
"background clinical manifestations of tuberculosis tb caused by mycobacterium tuberculosis mtb show lineagespecific differences contributed by genetic polymorphism such as phylosingle nucleotide variations phylosnps and insertion or deletions indels.
intragenomic rearrangement events such as gene duplications and deletions may cause gene copy number differences in mtb contributing to lineagespecific phenotypic variations if any which need better understanding.
results the relative gene copy number differences in highquality publicly available whole genome sequencing datasets of 9482 clinical mtb isolates were determined by repurposing and modifying an rnaseq data analysis pipeline.
the pipeline included various steps viz.
alignment of reads sorting by coordinate gc bias correction and variant stabilising transformation.
the strategy showed maximum separation of lineagespecific clusters in two principal components capturing 54 variability.
unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the top 100 genes and pairwise comparisons between mtb lineages revealed an overlapping subset of genes n42 having significantly perturbed copy numbers benjamin hochberg adjusted pvalue  0.05 and log2drugresistantsensitive  ± 1. these 42 genes formed multiple tandem gene clusters and are known to be involved in virulence pathogenicity and defence response to invading phages.
a separate comparison showed a significantly high copy number of phage genes and a recently reported druggable target rv1525 in pre and extensively drugresistant prexdr xdr compared to drugsensitive clinical mtb isolates.
conclusion the identified gene sets in mtb clinical isolates may be useful targets for lineagespecific therapeutics and diagnostics development."
" nonpublication of clinical trials results is an ongoing issue.
in 2016 the us government updated the results reporting requirements to clinicaltrials.gov for trials covered under the fda amendments act 2007. we set out to develop and deliver an online tool which publicly monitors compliance with these reporting requirements facilitates open public audit and promotes accountability."
"obesity is a complex chronic disease characterized by excessive adiposity and associations with numerous comorbidities including cancer.
despite extensive research we have limited understanding of the mechanisms coupling obesity to cancer risk and of the contexts in which obesity does or does not exacerbate disease.
here we show that chronic highfat diet hfdinduced obesity has no significant effect on the"
"immunoglobulin a iga is the most abundant antibody isotype produced across mammals and plays a specialized role in mucosal homeostasis.
constantly secreted into the lumen of the intestine iga binds commensal microbiota to regulate their colonization and function with unclear implications for health.
iga deficiency is common in humans but is difficult to study due to its complex aetiology and comorbidities"
"the sudden rise of the sarscov2 virus and the delay in the development of effective therapeutics to mitigate it made evident a need for ways to screen for compounds that can block infection and prevent further pathogenesis and spread.
yet identifying effective drugs efficacious against viral infection and replication with minimal toxicity for the patient can be difficult.
monoclonal antibodies were shown to be effective yet as the sarscov2 mutated these antibodies became ineffective.
small molecule antivirals were identified using pseudovirus constructs to recapitulate infection in nonhuman cells such as vero e6 cells.
however the impact was limited due to poor translation of these compounds in the clinical setting.
this is partly due to the lack of similarity of screening platforms to the in vivo physiology of the patient and partly because drugs effective in vitro showed doselimiting toxicities.
in this study we performed two highthroughput screens in human lung adenocarcinoma cells with authentic sarscov2 virus to identify both monoclonal antibodies that neutralize the virus and clinically useful kinase inhibitors to block the virus and prioritize minimal host toxicity.
using highcontent imaging combined with singlecell and multidimensional analysis we identified antibodies and kinase inhibitors that reduce virus infection without affecting the host.
our screening technique uncovered novel antibodies and overlooked kinase inhibitors i.e.
pik3i mtori multiple rtki that could be effective against sarscov2 virus.
further characterization of these molecules will streamline the repurposing of compounds for the treatment of future pandemics and uncover novel mechanisms viruses use to hijack and infect host cells."
"tables are useful information artifacts that allow easy detection of data missingness by humans and have been deployed by several publishers to improve the amount of information present for key resources and reagents such as antibodies cell lines and other tools that constitute the inputs to a study.
the starmethods tables specifically have increased the findability of these key resources but they have not been commonly available outside of the cell press journal family.
to improve the availability of these tables in the broader biomedical literature we have attempted to automatically process biorxiv preprints to create tables from text or to recognize tables already created by authors and structure them for later use by publishers and search systems to improve findability of resources in a larger amount of the scientific literature.
the extraction of key resource tables in pdf files by the best in class tools resulted in grid table similarity grits score of 0.12 so we have created several multimodal pipelines employing machine learning approaches for key resource table page identification table transformer models for table detection and table structure recognition and a new tablespecific language model for row oversegmentation to improve the extraction of text in tables created by biomedical authors and published on biorxiv to around grits score of 0.90 enabling the deployment of automated research resource extraction tools onto biorxiv."
"the growing field of wastewaterbased infectious disease surveillance relies on the quantification of pathogen concentrations in wastewater using polymerase chain reaction pcr techniques.
however existing models for monitoring pathogen spread using wastewater have often been adapted from methods for case count data and neglect the statistical features of pcr techniques.
in this paper we seek to overcome the widespread simplistic modelling of wastewater pcr measurements as normally or lognormally distributed by proposing an appropriate model for digital pcr dpcr.
building on established statistical theory of dpcr we derive approximations for the coefficient of variation of measurements and the probability of nondetection and propose a hurdle modelbased likelihood for estimating concentrations from dpcr measurements.
using simulations and realworld data we show that simple likelihoods based on normal or lognormal distributions are misspecified affecting the estimation of pathogen concentrations and infection trends over time.
in contrast the proposed dpcrspecific likelihood accurately models the distribution of dpcr measurements improving epidemiological estimates and forecasts even if details of the laboratory protocol are unknown.
the method has been implemented in the opensource r package episewer to improve wastewaterbased monitoring of pathogens."
"the present study sets out to explore the cognitive underpinnings of reading acquisition in arabic.
previous studies have identified phonological awareness and rapid automatized naming as early predictors.
however the graphic complexity of arabic letters imposes particular constraints on the visual system which should mobilize visual attention.
to test this hypothesis 101 arabicspeaking children who just began their formal reading instruction in arabic were administered tests of syllable and word reading.
their nonverbal reasoning vocabulary phonological awareness rapid automatized naming and letter knowledge were measured.
their visual attention was estimated through tasks of visual attention span.
we found that phonological awareness visual attention span and letter knowledge were associated with reading outcomes.
however regression analyses showed that the relationship between visual attention span and reading disappeared when letter knowledge was takenintoaccount.
we used structural equation modeling to examine the direct and indirect effects of visual attention span to reading.
results showed that phonological awareness and letter knowledge were significant and independent predictors of reading while visual attention span contributed only indirectly through its influence on letter knowledge.
our findings suggest that beginning readers rely on visual attention to identify and discriminate visuallycomplex arabic letters.
in turn more efficient letter identification in children with higher visual attention facilitates reading acquisition.
these findings support the cognitive models of word recognition that include visual attention as a component of the reading system.
they open new perspectives for crosslanguage studies suggesting that visual attention might contribute differently to reading depending on the orthographic system.
they also provide a foundation for innovative teaching methodologies in arabic language education."
"injuries to musculoskeletal interfaces such as the tendontobone insertion of the rotator cuff present significant physiological and clinical challenges for repair due to complex gradients of structure composition and cellularity.
advances in interface tissue engineering require stratified biomaterials able to both provide local instructive signals to support multiple tissue phenotypes while also reducing the risk of strain concentrations and failure at the transition between dissimilar materials.
here we describe adaptation of a thiolated gelatin gelsh hydrogel via selective amination of carboxylic acid subunits on the gelatin backbone.
the magnitude and kinetics of hrpmediated primary crosslinking and carbodiimidemediated secondary crosslinking reactions can be tuned through amination and thiolation of carboxylic acid subunits on the gelatin backbone.
we also show that a stratified biomaterial comprised of mineralized bonemimetic and nonmineralized tendonmimetic collagen scaffold compartments linked by an aminated gelsh hydrogel demonstrate improved mechanical performance and reduced strain concentrations.
together these results highlight significant mechanical advantages that can be derived from modifying the gelatin macromer via controlled amination and thiolation and suggest an avenue for tuning the mechanical performance of hydrogel interfaces within stratified biomaterials."
"communication between cells in metazoan organisms is mediated by a remarkably small number of highly conserved signaling pathways.
given the relatively small number of signaling pathways the existence of multiple related ligands for many of these pathways is thought to represent a key evolutionary innovation for encoding complexity into cellcell signaling.
relatedly crosstalk and other interactions between pathways is another critical feature which allows a modest number pathways to ultimately generate an enormously diverse range of outcomes.
it would thus be useful to have genetic tools to identify and manipulate not only those cells which express a given signaling ligand but also those cells that specifically coexpress pairs of signaling ligands.
here we present a collection of splitgal4 knockin lines targeting many of the ligands for highly conserved signaling pathways in  notch hedgehog fgf egf tgf jakstat jnk and pvr.
we demonstrate that these lines faithfully recapitulate the endogenous expression pattern of their targets and that they can be used to specifically identify the cells and tissues that coexpress pairs of signaling ligands.
as a proof of principle we demonstrate that the 4th chromosome tgf ligands  and  are broadly coexpressed in muscles and other tissues of both larva and adults and that the jakstat ligands  and  are partially coexpressed from cells of the midgut following gut damage.
together with our previously collection of splitgal4 lines targeting the seven wnt ligands this resource allows"
"singleingredient dietary supplements have demonstrated some potential to extend lifespan and improve healthspan however the efficacy of defined multiingredient nutraceuticals remains underexplored.
senolytic interventions have been successful in reducing multimorbidity frailty and cognitive decline in animal models and are seen as promising antiageing interventions in mammals.
we compared the effects of a 12ingredient nutraceutical on mice lifespan and healthspan markers with that of a high efficacy senolytic intervention consisting of a low dose of navitoclax combined with the specific mitochondrial uncoupler bam15.
both interventions were started at old age 20 months.
the supplement was given daily until the end of the experiment 30 months of age but the senolytic intervention consisted of two short 5 days each rounds of treatment at 20 and 23 months of age.
despite late onset both interventions increased median lifespan similarly by around 20 over controls.
the senolytic intervention significantly reduced frailty progression and improved cognitive function after the second round of treatment but without subsequent treatment these effects appeared to wane at later ages.
the multiingredient supplement tended to reduce frailty progression steadily with time albeit not significant and maintained cognitive function.
mechanistically in vitro there was no evidence of senolytic activity of the multiingredient nutraceutical as a whole nor of its individual ingredients.
continuous multiingredient dietary supplementation shows promise in achieving comparable antiageing efficacy as a senolytic intervention."
"a bilateral body plan is predominant throughout the animal kingdom.
bilaterality of amniote embryos becomes recognizable as midline morphogenesis begins at gastrulation bisecting an embryonic field into the left and right sides and leftright asymmetry patterning follows.
while a series of laterality genes expressed after the leftright compartmentalization has been extensively studied the laterality patterning prior to and during midline morphogenesis has remained unclear.
here through a biophysical quantification in a high spatial and temporal resolution applied to a chick model system we show that a largescale bilateral counterrotating cellular flow termed as polonaise movements display leftright asymmetries in early gastrulation.
this cell movement starts prior to the formation of the primitive streak which is the earliest midline structure and earlier than expression of laterality genes.
the cellular flow speed and vorticity unravel the location and timing of the leftright asymmetries.
the bilateral flows displayed a right dominance after six hours since the start of cell movements.
mitotic arrest that diminishes primitive streak formation resulted in changes in the bilateral flow pattern but the right dominance persisted.
our data indicate that the leftright asymmetry in amniote gastrula becomes detectable prior to the point when the asymmetric regulation of the laterality signals at the node leads to the leftright patterning.
more broadly our results suggest that physical processes can play an unexpected but significant role in influencing leftright laterality during embryonic development."
"although the cxcl12cxcr4 pathway has been prior investigated for its prometastatic and immunosuppressive roles in the tumor microenvironment evidence on the spatiotemporal regulation of these hallmarks has been lacking.
here we demonstrate that cxcl12 forms a gradient specifically around cancer cell intravasation doorways also known as tumor microenvironment of metastasis tmem doorways thus facilitating the chemotactic translocation of prometastatic tumor cells expressing cxcr4 toward the perivascular tmem doorways for subsequent entry into peripheral circulation.
furthermore we demonstrate that the cxcl12rich microenvironment around tmem doorways may create immunosuppressive niches whereby cd8 t cells despite being attracted to these regions often exhibit reduced effector functions limiting their efficacy.
while the cxcl12cxcr4 pathway can minimally influence the overall composition of immune cell populations it biases the distribution of cd8 t cells away from tmem doorways justifying its priorestablished role as immunosuppressive factor for cd8 t cells.
our research suggests that the complex interactions between cxcl12 and the various tumor and immune cell types contributes not only to the completion of the initial steps of the metastatic cascade but also offers an immunological sanctuary to prometastatic tumor cells homed around tmem doorways.
overall our study enhances our current understanding on the mechanisms via which cxcl12 orchestrates tumor cell behavior and immune dynamics potentially guiding future therapeutic strategies to combat breast cancer metastasis and improve antitumor immunity."
"extracellular vesicles evs are membranederived vesicles continuously shed by cells into the extracellular space.
with cargos containing nucleic acids and other proteins evs play key roles in intercellular communication and other biological processes and are widely regarded as promising biomarkers for disease detection.
evs are abundantly found in virtually every biofluid including blood urine and saliva.
while there are numerous technologies to isolate evs in blood and urine isolating evs from saliva remains a challenge as it is highly complex and heterogeneous—cells debris and other proteins can all inhibit the isolation of evs by traditional platforms.
here we employ the candycollect a lollipopinspired sampling device with open microfluidic channels as a noninvasive and patientfriendly alternative for the capture of salivary evs.
the candycollect simplifies sample preparation by effectively preconcentrating evs on the device surface before evs are eluted off of the candycollect labeled with cholesteroltagged oligonucleotides and subsequently detected by qpcr with primers specific for the tagged oligos to enumerate the relative number of evs.
we demonstrate that downstream ev cargo analysis can be performed using simoa.
overall the candycollect ushers a new method to capture enumerate and analyze salivary evs."
"the heterogeneity of epithelialtomesenchymal transition emt programs is manifest in the diverse emtlike phenotypes occurring during tumor progression.
however little is known about the mechanistic basis and functional role of specific forms of emt in cancer.
here we address this question in lung adenocarcinoma luad cells that enter a dormancy period in response to tgfβ upon disseminating to distant sites.
luad cells with the capacity to enter dormancy are characterized by expression of sox2 and nkx21 primitive progenitor markers.
in these cells tgfβ induces growth inhibition accompanied by a full emt response that subsequently transitions into an atypical mesenchymal state of round morphology and lacking actin stress fibers.
tgfβ induces this transition by driving the expression of the actindepolymerizing factor gelsolin which changes a migratory stress fiberrich mesenchymal phenotype into a cortical actinrich spheroidal state.
this transition lowers the biomechanical stiffness of metastatic progenitors protecting them from killing by mechanosensitive cytotoxic t lymphocytes ctls and natural killer nk cells.
inhibiting this actin depolymerization process clears tissues of dormant metastatic cells.
thus luad primitive progenitors undergo an atypical emt as part of a strategy to evade immunemediated elimination during dormancy.
our results provide a mechanistic basis and functional role of this atypical emt response of luad metastatic progenitors and further illuminate the role of tgfβ as a crucial driver of immune evasive metastatic dormancy."
"computerized cognitive training programs are becoming increasingly popular and practical for cognitive aging.
nevertheless basic questions remain about the benefits of such programs and about the degree to which participant expectations might influence training and transfer.
here we examined a commercial cognitive training program  in a 5week doubleblind pseudorandomized placebocontrolled trial.
based on a priori power analysis we recruited 99 healthy older adults 5991 years of age m  68.87 sd  6.31 69 women assigning them to either the intervention or an active control program sudoku and nback working memory exercises.
we subdivided both groups into high and low expectation priming conditions to probe for effects of participants’ expectations on training and transfer.
we assessed transfer using a battery of standard neuropsychological and psychosocial measures that had been agreed to by the training program developers.
we planned and preregistered our analyses on osf.io.
the majority 88 of participants progressed through the training and most provided positive feedback about it.
similarly the majority 80 of participants believed they were truly training their brains.
yet transfer of training was minimal.
also minimal were any effects of expectations on training and transfer although participants who received high expectation priming tended to engage more with their assigned program overall.
our findings suggest limited benefits of"
" biological control is a sustainable strategy to combat agricultural pests.
yet due to legislation importing nonnative biocontrol agents is increasingly restricted.
thus selective breeding of biocontrol traits of native species is suggested to enhance performance of existing biocontrol agents.
genomic prediction is a new alternative to exploit genetic variation for improving biocontrol efficacy.
this study aims to establish proofofprinciple for genomic prediction in insect biocontrol agents using wing morphology traits in the parasitoid"
"zebrafish have emerged as a central model organism in toxicological research.
zebrafish embryos are exempt from certain animal testing regulations which facilitates their use in toxicological testing.
next to the zebrafish embryo acute toxicity test zfet according to the oecd tg 236 fish embryos are used in mechanistic investigations chemical screenings in ecotoxicology and drug development.
however inconsistencies in the applied test protocols and the monitored endpoints in addition to a lack of standardized data formats impede comprehensive metaanalyses and crossstudy comparisons.
to address these challenges we developed the integrated effect database for toxicological observations intob a comprehensive data management tool that standardizes collection of metadata and phenotypic observations using a controlled vocabulary.
by incorporating data from more than 600 experiments into the database and subsequent comprehensive data analyses we demonstrate its utility in improving the comparability and interoperability of toxicity data.
our results show that the zfet can detect toxicity spanning seven orders of magnitude at the scale of effect concentrations.
we also highlight the potential of readacross analyses based on morphological fingerprints and their connection to chemical modes of action provide information on control variability of the zfet and highlight the importance of time for mechanistic understanding in chemical exposureeffect assessments.
we provide the full fair dataset as well as the analysis workflow and demonstrate how professional data management as enabled with intob marks a significant advancement by offering a comprehensive framework for the systematic use of zebrafish embryo toxicity data thus paving the way for more reliable datadriven chemical risk assessment."
"in developing epithelia cells become planar polarised with asymmetric localisation of the core planar polarity proteins to opposite cell membranes where they form stable intercellular complexes.
current models differ regarding the signalling mechanisms required for core protein polarisation.
here we investigate the existence of cellintrinsic cellscale signalling  in the"
"this study sheds light on how journalists respond to evolving debates within academia around topics including research integrity improper use of metrics to measure research quality and impact and the risks and benefits of the open science movement.
drawing on semistructured interviews with 19 health and science journalists we describe journalists’ awareness of these controversies and the ways in which that awareness in turn shapes the practices they use to select verify and communicate research.
our findings suggest that journalists’ perceptions of debates in scholarly communication vary widely with some displaying a highly critical and nuanced understanding and others presenting a more limited awareness.
those with a more indepth understanding report closely scrutinizing the research they report carefully vetting the study design methodology and analyses.
those with a more limited awareness are more trusting of the peer review system as a quality control system and more willing to rely on researchers when determining what research to report on and how to vet and frame it.
we discuss the benefits and risks of these varied perceptions and practices highlighting the implications for the nature of the research media coverage that reaches the public."
"tropical milkweed asclepias curassavica serves as a host plant for monarch butterflies danaus plexippus and other insect herbivores that can tolerate the abundant cardiac glycosides that are characteristic of this species.
cardiac glycosides along with additional specialized metabolites also contribute to the ethnobotanical uses of a. curassavica.
to facilitate further research on milkweed metabolism we assembled the 197 mbp genome of a fifthgeneration inbred line of a. curassavica into 619 contigs with an n50 of 10 mbp.
scaffolding resulted in 98 of the assembly being anchored to 11 chromosomes which are mostly colinear with the previously assembled common milkweed a. syriaca genome.
assembly completeness evaluations showed that 98 of the busco gene set is present in the a. curassavica genome assembly.
the transcriptomes of six tissue types young leaves mature leaves stems flowers buds and roots with and without defense elicitation by methyl jasmonate treatment showed both tissuespecific gene expression and induced expression of genes that may be involved in cardiac glycoside biosynthesis.
expression of a cyp87a gene the predicted first gene in the cardiac glycoside biosynthesis pathway was observed only in the stems and roots and was induced by methyl jasmonate.
together this genome sequence and transcriptome analysis provide important resources for further investigation of the ecological and medicinal uses of a. curassavica."
"traumatic brain injury tbi is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide with longterm neurological and psychological impacts.
recent studies have indicated that diabetes t1dm exacerbates the outcomes of tbi leading to more severe cognitive deficits and increased risk of complications.
this study investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets for t1dmassociated tbi.
four mrna datasets gse4745 gse125451 gse173975 and gse80174 downloaded from geo repository were used in this study.
using limma a total of 284 differentially expressed genes degs were identified in t1dm of which 11 were upregulated and 9 were downregulated.
gsea showed that these degs were significantly enriched in cell communication lipid metabolic process and ppar signaling.
a total of 584 degs were identified in tbi of which 186 were upregulated and 9 were downregulated.
gsea showed that these degs were mainly enriched in immune responseregulating signaling pathway.
wgcna identified 122 significant genes in tidmrelated modules and 368 significant genes in tbirelated module.
go and kegg enrichment analysis showed that t1dm module genes were significantly correlated with lipid metabolic process and ribosome biogenesis while tbi module genes were significantly correlated with inflammation and immune response including leukocyte mediated immunity lymphocyte mediated immunity and cytokine mediated receptor activity.
ppi network analysis of t1dm module genes identified 20 hub genes including 14 ribosomal genes rpl23 rps3a rps6 rpl5 rpl17 rps24 rpl23a rps4x rpl9 rps15a14 rpl30 rpl31 rps25 and rps27a2.
the hub genes were primarily related to ribosome biogenesis and rna posttranscriptional regulation.
ppi network analysis of tbi module genes identified 20 hub genes ptprc tp53 stat1 stat3 tyrobp itgad csf1r itgb2 rac2 icam1 myd88 cd44 vav1 aif1 c1qa laptm5 b2m fcer1g and lyn.
the hub genes were primarily related to inflammatory mediators and immune response.
based on the overlap of t1dm module genes and tbi module genes cmklr1 mgst1 and plin2 were identified as key genes of t1dmassociated tbi.
functional enrichment analysis showed that they were primarily enriched in the cellular response to hydroperoxide cytokinemediated receptor signaling activity regulation of sequestering of triglyceride negative regulation of il12 production and positive regulation of macrophage chemotaxis.
using reactome cmklr1 mgst1 and plin2 were related to cytokine signaling activity neutrophil degranulation and lipid storage respectively.
we concluded that lipid droplet dysregulation and neuroinflammation are the potential molecular mechanisms of t1dmassociated tbi.
cmklr1 mgst1 and plin2 are positively correlated with t1dmassociated tbi and may be important biomarkers and potential treatment targets for diabetic tbi."
"macromolecular protein complexes carry out most functions in the cell including essential functions required for cell survival.
unfortunately we lack the subunit composition for all human protein complexes.
to address this gap we integrated 25000 mass spectrometry experiments using a machine learning approach to identify  15000 human protein complexes.
we show our map of protein complexes is highly accurate and more comprehensive than previous maps placing 75 of human proteins into their physical contexts.
we globally characterize our complexes using protein covariation data proteomehd.2 and identify covarying complexes suggesting common functional associations.
our map also generates testable functional hypotheses for 472 uncharacterized proteins which we support using alphafold modeling.
additionally we use alphafold modeling to identify 511 mutually exclusive protein pairs in hu.map3.0 complexes suggesting complexes serve different functional roles depending on their subunit composition.
we identify expression as the primary way cells and organisms relieve the conflict of mutually exclusive subunits.
finally we import our complexes to emblebis complex portal httpswww.ebi.ac.ukcomplexportalhome as well as provide complexes through our hu.map3.0 web interface httpshumap3.proteincomplexes.org.
we expect our resource to be highly impactful to the broader research community."
"noncell autonomous induction of stem cell fate is a shared feature across multicellular organisms however the underlying mechanisms diverge substantially between the kingdoms of live.
in plants cell to cell mobility of transcription factors has emerged as a key paradigm.
for the shoot apical meristem of the reference plant arabidopsis thaliana it has been described that the translocation of the wuschel homeodomain transcription factor from niche cells to stem cells is essential for their maintenance.
here we systematically investigate the function of diverse wus alleles and leverage multispectral live cell imaging coupled to computational analysis and mechanistic mathematical modelling to show that wuschel protein mobility is the result of balance between active transport and retention in niche cells and likely independent of the stem cell signal clavata3.
importantly we show that diffusion across cell layers of the meristem is not symmetrical suggesting that there is unexpected complexity in cellular connections."
"recent studies show that the dysregulation of the transcription factor sox10 is essential for development and progression of melanoma.
micrornas mirnas can regulate the expression of transcription factors at the posttranscriptional level.
the interactions between sox10 and its targeting mirnas form network motifs such as feedforward and feedback loops.
such motifs can result in nonlinear dynamics in gene expression levels therefore playing a crucial role in regulating tumor proliferation and metastasis as well as tumor’s responses to therapies.
here we reviewed and discussed the intricate interplay between sox10 and mirnas in melanoma biology including melanogenesis phenotype switch and therapy resistance.
additionally we investigated the gene regulatory interactions in melanoma identifying crucial network motifs that involve both sox10 and mirnas.
we also analyzed the expression levels of the components within these motifs.
from a control theory perspective we explained how these dynamics are linked to the phenotypic plasticity of melanoma cells.
in summary we underscored the importance of employing a datadriven network biology approach to elucidate the complex regulatory mechanisms and identify driver network motifs within the melanoma network.
this methodology facilitates a deeper understanding of the regulation of sox10 by mirnas in melanoma.
the insight gained could potentially contribute to the development of mirnabased treatments for sox10 thereby enhancing the clinical management of this malignancy."
"using a restricted set of behavioral responses corals must obtain sufficient light to maximize photosynthesis while simultaneously avoiding predation and molecular damage from uv radiation.
this study investigates the polyp behavioral response of the caribbean octocoral  to shading and how this response influences reactions to a simulated predator cue.
in experiment i we measured changes in polyp extension before and after a shade structure was placed over colonies on a shallow patch reef in the florida keys.
in experiment ii changes in polyp extension were measured following a simulated predator cue for both shaded and unshaded colonies.
experiment i demonstrates that"
"to colonize plants pathogenic bacteria modulate the biology of the host employing different bacterial secretion systems.
for example the type ii secretion system t2ss releases toxins proteases lipases and carbohydratedegrading enzymes into the extracellular environment to promote tissue softening and soft rot.
in this way the t2ss promotes virulence of phytopathogenic gramnegative bacteria.
however the role of the t2ss and its substrates for vascular disease remains enigmatic.
here we show that the xpst2ss allows xanthomonas campestris pv.
campestris xcc to breach the tissue barrier between hydathodes  the initial bacterial entry point  and xylem thereby gaining access to the leaf vasculature.
yet xpst2ss was dispensable for bacterial multiplication in the leaf apoplast or inside the hydathode cavity suggesting a role beyond plant defense suppression or nutrient acquisition.
using comparative genomics four plant cell walldegrading enzymes cwdes were found to be associated with vascular pathogenesis.
testing gene knockout combinations of those enzymes revealed that virulence of only the quadruple cwde mutant was down to the level of the xpst2ss mutant.
our results thus demonstrate that the xpst2ss and a set of cwdes that is likely secreted by this system allow xcc to break this tissue barrier enabling longdistance mobility of xcc inside the host plant.
we thus expand our understanding on how certain bacterial pathogens have specialized towards vascular pathogens."
"synthetic metal chelators are widely used in industrial clinical and agricultural settings leading to their accumulation in the environment.
although the effects of chelators on metal solubility and bioavailability are well documented their impact on microbial physiology is not well defined.
we measured the growth of  a common soil and aquatic bacterium in the presence of the ubiquitous chelator ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid edta and found that it restricts growth by reducing intracellular iron levels.
using barcoded transposon sequencing we identified an operonic gene pair  that is required to maintain iron homeostasis during edta challenge.
encodes one of four tonbdependent transporters that are regulated by the ferric uptake repressor fur and stands out among this group of genes in its ability to support  growth across diverse media conditions.
the function of ccit strictly requires  which encodes a cytoplasmic fe dioxygenasefamily protein.
our results thus define a functional partnership between an outer membrane iron receptor and a cytoplasmic dioxygenase that are broadly coconserved in proteobacteria.
we expanded our analysis of the  system to natural environments by measuring the growth of mutant strains in freshwater from two ecologically distinct lakes which have significantly different nutritional and geochemical profiles compared to standard laboratory media.
and  were not required for growth in lake water regardless of edta presence highlighting the iron acquisition versatility of  in"
"oleaginous fungi known for their high lipid content—up to 80 of their dry mass—are of significant interest for biotechnological applications particularly in biofuel and fatty acid production.
among these the genus"
"endurance exercise performance is associated with a welldeveloped skeletal muscle mitochondrial network which is composed of subsarcolemmal mitochondria interconnected with intermyofibrillar mitochondria bending around the myofibrils.
highaltitude exposure is typically incorporated in elite sport training regimens but little is known about how this network adapts to an environment characterised by tissue hypoxia.
for this reason we investigated how highaltitude exposure affects mitochondrial subcellular distribution ultrastructure respiratory control and intrinsic mitochondrial respiratory capacity.
nine healthy and recreationally active sealevel residents eight males and one female resided at an altitude of 3454 m with biopsies collected from the vastus lateralis muscle before and after 7 and 28 days at high altitude.
the muscular mitochondrial volume density  increased after highaltitude exposure driven by an increase in the intermyofibrillar .
this was however accompanied by a decreased cristae surface area per skeletal muscle fibre volume  because of a decline in the cristae surface area per mitochondrial volume .
despite a reduced  massspecific maximal coupled respiration  increased slightly and was considerably elevated when normalised to  suggesting intrinsic adaptations to high altitude.
the difference between cristaespecific  and an associated cristaespecific leak respiration  indicated a markedly higher degree of coupling between the electron flow in the electron transport system and atp production.
as the effect size 95 confidence intervals includes trivial effects the results need to be substantiated.
in conclusion highaltitude exposure altered mitochondrial subcellular distribution ultrastructure and induced intrinsic respiratory adaptations."
"understanding how proteins in different mammalian tissues are regulated is central to biology.
protein abundance turnover and posttranslational modifications like phosphorylation are key factors that determine tissuespecific proteome properties.
however these properties are challenging to study across tissues and remain poorly understood.
here we present turnoverppt a comprehensive resource mapping the abundance and lifetime of 11000 proteins and 40000 phosphosites across eight mouse tissues and various brain regions using advanced proteomics and stable isotope labeling.
we revealed tissuespecific short and longlived proteins strong correlations between interacting protein lifetimes and distinct impacts of phosphorylation on protein turnover.
notably we discovered that peroxisomes are regulated by protein turnover across tissues and that phosphorylation regulates the stability of neurodegenerationrelated proteins such as tau and αsynuclein.
thus turnoverppt provides new fundamental insights into protein stability tissue dynamic proteotypes and the role of protein phosphorylation and is accessible via an interactive webbased portal at httpsyslproteomics.shinyapps.iotissueppt."
"the evolutionary introduction of asymmetric cell division acd into the developmental program facilitates the formation of a new cell type contributing to developmental diversity and eventually to species diversification.
the micromere of the sea urchin embryo may serve as one of those examples an acd at the 16cell stage forms micromeres unique to echinoids among echinoderms.
we previously reported that a polarity factor activator of gprotein signaling ags plays a crucial role in micromere formation.
however ags and its associated acd factors are present in all echinoderms and across most metazoans leaving a question of what evolutionary modification of ags protein or its surrounding molecular environment contributed to the evolutionary acquisition of micromeres only in echinoids.
in this study we learned that the goloco motifs at the ags cterminus play critical roles in regulating micromere formation in sea urchin embryos.
further other echinoderms ags or chimeric ags that contain the cterminus of ags orthologs from various organisms showed varied localization and function in micromere formation.
in contrast the sea star or the pencil urchin orthologs of other acd factors were consistently localized at the vegetal cortex in the sea urchin embryo suggesting that ags may be a unique variable factor that facilitates acd diversity among echinoderms.
consistently sea urchin ags appears to facilitate micromerelike cell formation and accelerate the enrichment timing of the germline factor vasa during early embryogenesis of the pencil urchin an ancestral type of sea urchin.
based on these observations we propose that the molecular evolution of a single polarity factor facilitates acd diversity while preserving the core acd machinery among echinoderms and beyond during evolution."
"stat3 signalling has been studied extensively in the context of selfrenewal and differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.
zygotic stat3 is required for normal postimplantation development.
on an outbred genetic background  null embryos consistently lagged behind their littermates beginning with significant reduction of epiblast cells at implantation.
remarkably mutants closely resemble nonaffected embryos from the previous day at all postimplantation stages examined.
we pinpoint this phenotype to loss of the serinephosphorylated form of stat3 which predominates in postimplantation embryonic tissues.
bulk rnasequencing analysis of isolated mouse epiblasts confirmed  null embryos exhibited developmental delay transcriptionally.
single cell rna sequencing of mid gestation chimaeras containing stat3 null embryonic stem cells revealed exclusion of mutant cells exclusively from the erythroid lineage.
although stat3 null embryonic stem cells can differentiate into erythroid and hematopoietic lineages in vitro they are outcompeted when mixed with wild type cells.
combined with the reduced size of stat3 null epiblasts after implantation our results implicate a role for stat3 in cell proliferation affecting temporal control of embryonic progression and rapid differentiation."
"the biosynthesis of camp by mammalian membranebound adenylyl cyclases macs is predominantly regulated by gproteincoupledreceptors gpcrs.
up to now the two hexahelical transmembrane domains of macs were considered to fix the enzyme to membranes.
here we show that the transmembrane domains serve in addition as signal receptors and transmitters of lipid signals that control gsalphastimulated mac activities.
we identify aliphatic fatty acids and anandamide as receptor ligands of mac isoforms 1 to 7 and 9. the ligands enhance mac isoforms 2 3 7 and 9 or attenuate isoforms 1 4 5 and 6 gsalphastimulated mac activities in vitro and in vivo.
substitution of the stimulatory membrane receptor of mac3 by the inhibitory receptor of mac5 results in a ligand inhibited mac5mac3 chimera.
thus we discovered a new class of membrane receptors in which two signaling modalities are at a crossing direct tonic lipid and indirect phasic gpcrgsalpha signaling regulating the biosynthesis of camp."
"rhomboid proteases are ubiquitous intramembrane serine proteases that can cleave transmembrane substrates within lipid bilayers.
they exhibit many and diverse functions such as but not limited to growth factor signaling immune and inflammatory response protein quality control and parasitic invasion.
human rhomboid protease rhbdl4 has been demonstrated to play a critical role in removing misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum and is implicated in severe diseases such as various cancers and alzheimers disease.
therefore rhbdl4 is expected to constitute an important therapeutic target for such devastating diseases.
despite its critical role in many biological processes the enzymatic properties of rhbdl4 remain largely unknown.
to enable a comprehensive characterization of rhbdl4s kinetics catalytic parameters substrate specificity and binding modality we expressed and purified recombinant rhbdl4 and employed it in a forster resonance energy transferbased cleavage assay.
until now kinetic studies have been limited mostly to bacterial rhomboid proteases.
our in vitro platform offers a new method for studying rhbdl4s enzymatic function and substrate preferences.
furthermore we developed and tested potential inhibitors using our assay and successfully identifying peptidyl αketoamide inhibitors of rhbdl4 that are highly effective against recombinant rhbdl4.
we utilize ensemble docking and molecular dynamics md simulations to explore the binding modality of substratederived peptides bound to rhbdl4.
our analysis focused on key interactions and dynamic movements within rhbdl4s active site that contributed to binding stability offering valuable insights for optimizing the nonprime side of rhbdl4 ketoamide inhibitors.
in summary our study offers fundamental insights into rhbdl4s catalytic activities and substrate preferences laying the foundation for downstream applications such as drug inhibitor screenings and structurefunction studies which will enable the identification of lead drug compounds for rhbdl4."
"clear cell renal cell carcinoma ccrcc is the most prevalent type of kidney cancer characterized by its diverse tumor composition featuring various subclonal populations that hinder effective treatment responses.
tumoroids present an avenue for modelling this diversity and replicating the intricate tumor heterogeneity.
spatial transcriptomics preserves the spatial context of gene expression enabling us to study distinct tumor areas and the influence on overall diversity.
our spatial transcriptomics analysis uncovered tumor clusters with distinct genetic profiles that showcase various functional areas in depth and offer valuable understandings into the diversity of ccrcc types.
some of these tumor clusters exhibited activity in genes responsible for protein catabolism and reduced abundance of genes related to mitochondrial respiration processes.
we also show isoform expression within tumoroids in particular glutaminase gls especially with the prevalence of the highly metabolically active gac isoform that is expressed in regions where mitochondrial gene abundance is lower whereas the kga isoform displayed a more focal expression pattern.
combining longread spatial transcriptomics with organoid models presents a novel strategy for unravelling gene and transcript level complexity."
" the successful production of industrially relevant natural products hinges on two key factors the cultivation of robust microbial chassis capable of synthesizing the desired compounds and the availability of reliable genetic tools for expressing target genes.
the development of versatile and portable genetic tools offers a streamlined pathway to efficiently produce a variety of compounds in wellestablished chassis organisms.
the σ"
"ash dieback adb caused by the invasive alien fungal pathogen  is an emerging disease that poses major threats to the survival of common ash  in europe.
here we report on a field trial aiming at the identification of adb tolerant genotypes while encompassing the genetic diversity of common ash in austria.
over 35000 progenies from more than 600 putative tolerant mother trees were assessed for adb symptoms over a period of three years.
one tolerant and one susceptible progeny from a subset of the mother tree range 570 trees were genotyped using the 4tree array a genotyping tool developed specifically to screen common ash provenances for their tolerance to ash dieback.
we aimed to 1 better characterize the genetic structure of common ash in austria 2 identify hybrids between common ash and  narrowleaved ash 3 detect genetic loci associated with tolerance to adb and 4 identify genetic variation associated with abiotic factors such as temperature and precipitation influencing the severity of adb.
we identify ash individuals from eastern austria matching putative hybrids with  showing varying degrees of"
"multiple myeloma mm is a hematological malignancy associated with poor prognosis and relapses.
mm has a strong inherited component and while the mutational and transcriptomic landscapes of mm have been characterized extensively the molecular consequences of germline genetic variation in mm have not been previously explored.
here we have leveraged matched genotype and expression data from 607 patients to map the germline and somatic regulatory variation in mm.
we find that noncoding variation shapes the transcriptional landscape of mm contributing to overall survival.
these regulatory variants alter the binding of transcription factors with known importance in mm such as irf4 providing insights into the underlying mechanisms.
these data contribute to the increasing understanding of the genetic molecular and cellular forces shaping mm risk and outcomes."
"her2 overexpression significantly contributes to the aggressive nature and recurrent patterns observed in various solid tumors notably gastric cancers.
trastuzumab her2targeting monoclonal antibody drug has shown considerable clinical success however readily emerging drug resistance emphasizes the pressing need for improved interventions in her2overexpressing cancers.
to address this we proposed targeting the proteinprotein interaction ppi between elf3 and med23 as an alternative therapeutic approach to trastuzumab.
in this study we synthesized a total of 26 compounds consisting of 10 chalcones 7 pyrazoline acetyl and 9 pyrazoline propionyl derivatives and evaluated their biological activity as potential elf3med23 ppi inhibitors.
upon systematic analysis candidate compound 10 was selected due to its potency in downregulating reporter gene activity of her2 promoter confirmed by seap activity and its effect on her2 protein and mrna levels.
compound 10 effectively disrupted the binding interface between the elf3 tad domain and the 391582 amino acid region of med23 resulting in successful inhibition of the elf3med23 ppi.
this intervention led to a substantial reduction in her2 levels and its downstream signals in the her2positive gastric cancer cell line.
subsequently compound 10 induced significant apoptosis and antiproliferative effects demonstrating superior in vitro and in vivo anticancer activity overall.
we found that the anticancer activity of compound 10 was not only restricted to trastuzumabsensitive cases but was also valid for trastuzumabrefractory clones.
this suggests its potential as a viable therapeutic option for trastuzumabresistant gastric cancers.
in summary compound 10 could be a novel alternative therapeutic strategy for her2overexpressing cancers overcoming the limitations of trastuzumab."
"there is a growing number of articles about conversational ai i.e.
chatgpt for generating scientific literature reviews and summaries.
yet comparative evidence lags its wide adoption by many clinicians and researchers.
we explored chatgpt’s utility for literature search from an enduser perspective through the lens of clinicians and biomedical researchers.
we quantitatively compared basic versions of chatgpt’s utility against conventional search methods such as google and pubmed.
we further tested whether chatgpt usersupport tools i.e.
plugins webbrowsing function promptengineering and customgpts could improve its response across four common and practical literature search scenarios  highinterest topics with an abundance of information  niche topics with limited information  scientific hypothesis generation and  for newly emerging clinical practices questions.
our results demonstrated that basic chatgpt functions had limitations in consistency accuracy and relevancy.
usersupport tools showed improvements but the limitations persisted.
interestingly each literature search scenario posed different challenges an abundance of secondary information sources in high interest topics and uncompelling literatures for newniche topics.
this study tested practical examples highlighting both the potential and the pitfalls of integrating conversational ai into literature search processes and underscores the necessity for rigorous comparative assessments of ai tools in scientific research."
"animals integrate multiple sensory inputs to explore environments and execute locomotor behaviors.
to carry out these behaviors the nervous system internally reweights controller gains putting more emphasis on those with the least uncertainty e.g.
in a bayesian framework.
meanwhile as sensory uncertainty increases animals produce more vigorous active sensing movements.
to better understand the link between these two complementary processes—multisensory reweighting and active sensing—we studied how the weakly electric glass knifefish"
"catecholamine dysregulation is a common feature of multiple acute and chronic cardiac conditions including heart failure.
to investigate the role of altered αadrenergic stimulation on cardiac function we developed a shortterm exposure model administering phenylephrine subcutaneously to mice for one week.
compared to vehicleinjected controls phenylephrinetreated animals exhibited increased ejection fraction decreased chamber size diastolic dysfunction and ventricular hypertrophy in the absence of hypertension.
remarkably these animals developed extensive fibrotic remodeling of the tissue that plateaued at 24 hours and myocyte hypertrophy localized to regions of fibrotic deposition after 3 days of treatment.
transcriptome analyses of purified myocyte and fibroblast populations from these hearts revealed an unexpected role for myocytes in the production of extracellular matrix.
comparison with other models of cardiac stress including pressure overload hypertrophy and cytokine activation of fibroblasts identified stimulusspecific transcriptional circuits associated with cardiac pathology.
given the rapid robust fibrotic response that preceded myocyte hypertrophy intercellular communication analyses were conducted to investigate fibroblast to myocyte signaling identifying potential crosstalk between these cells.
these studies thoroughly describe and phenotypically characterize a new model of shortterm catecholamine stress and provide an atlas of transcriptional remodeling in myocytes and fibroblasts."
"the plasma membrane potential has been linked to cell proliferation for more than 40 years.
here we experimentally showed that membrane depolarization upregulates cell mitosis and that this process is dependent on voltagedependent activation of erk.
erk activity exhibits a membrane potentialdependency that is independent from the growth factor.
this membrane potential dependence was observed even close to the resting membrane potential indicating that small changes in resting membrane potential can alter cell proliferative activity.
the voltagedependent erk activity is derived from changed dynamics of phosphatidylserine which is present in the plasma membrane and not by extracellular calcium entry.
the data suggests that crucial biological processes such as cell proliferation are regulated by the physicochemical properties of the lipid.
this study suggests that membrane potential may have diverse physiological functions beyond the action potential which is wellestablished in the neural system."
"cd8 tcells are essential for spontaneous and therapyinduced restriction of tumor progression.
upon radiotherapy these preexisting cd8 tcells expand rapidly after their initial decline and are essential and sufficient for early tumor control.
stemlike cd8 tcells proliferate and differentiate into effector cd8 tcells in response to radiotherapy and are thus key determinants of therapy efficacy.
our findings highlight the critical role of intratumoral stemlike cd8 tcells in driving radiotherapyinduced antitumor immunity.
our study provides deeper insights into the dynamic behavior of cd8 tcells and their critical involvement in tumor control following radiotherapy."
"endosymbiotic reproductive manipulators are widely studied as sources of postzygotic isolation in arthropods but their effect on prezygotic isolation between genetically differentiated populations has garnered less attention.
we tested this using two partially isolated populations of the red and green colour forms of  either uninfected or infected with different  strains one inducing cytoplasmic incompatibility and the other not.
we first investigated male and female preferences and found that in absence of infection females were not choosy but all males preferred redform females.
effects were more subtle with only the ciinducing strain slightly strengthening colourform based preferences.
we then performed a doublemating experiment to test how incompatible matings affect subsequent mating behaviour and offspring production as compared to compatible matings.
females mated with an incompatible male infected andor heterotypic were more attractive andor receptive to subsequent compatible matings although analyses of offspring production revealed no clear benefit for this remating behaviour i.e.
apparently unaltered first male sperm precedence.
finally by computing the relative contributions of each reproductive barrier to total isolation we showed that premating isolation matches both hostassociated and induced postmating isolation suggesting that"
"affective experiences within academic contexts significantly influence educational outcomes.
despite this the literature reveals a gap in generalising these effects to specific classroom activities partly arising from the absence of suitable instruments to measure emotions in situational educational scenarios.
our study introduces an experience sampling method to measure sixteen discrete emotional states deriving two scales for positive and negative activating emotions.
grounded in psychological and neuroscientific theories that integrate emotion with cognition our research explores the interplay between prior knowledge preservice teachers’ anticipatory situational emotions and subsequent learning in an experimental science education context.
analysing data from 269 preservice teachers from diverse backgrounds stem and nonstem at the uppersecondary level we found that negative activating emotions are often rooted in nonstem backgrounds and exacerbated by limited prior science knowledge.
these negative emotions impact achievement and learning primarily through the mediating role of boredom.
furthermore our results indicate that the detrimental impact of boredom on achievement is significantly influenced by prior knowledge with a more pronounced effect on students with lower levels.
given that emotions are amenable to intervention our findings propose that specifically addressing boredom in students with low prior knowledge could amplify the benefits of educational strategies."
"niches are often found in specific positions in tissues relative to the stem cells they support.
consistency of niche position suggests that placement is important for niche function.
however the complexity of most niches has precluded a thorough understanding of how their proper placement is established.
to address this we investigated the formation of a genetically tractable niche the drosophila posterior signaling center psc the assembly of which had not been previously explored.
this niche controls hematopoietic progenitors of the lymph gland lg.
psc cells were previously shown to be specified laterally in the embryo but ultimately reside dorsally at the lg posterior.
here using liveimaging we show that psc cells migrate as a tight collective and associate with multiple tissues during their trajectory to the lg posterior.
we find that slit emanating from two extrinsic sources visceral mesoderm and cardioblasts is required for the psc to remain a collective and for its attachment to cardioblasts during migration.
without proper slitrobo signaling psc cells disperse form aberrant contacts and ultimately fail to reach their stereotypical position near progenitors.
our work characterizes a novel example of niche formation and identifies an extrinsic signaling relay that controls precise niche positioning."
"the vaginal microbiomes role in risk progression and treatment of female cancers has been widely explored.
yet there remains a need to develop methods to understand the interaction of microbiome factors with host cells and to characterize their potential therapeutic functions.
to address this challenge we developed a systems biology framework we term the pharmacobiome for microbiome pharmacology analysis.
the pharmacobiome framework evaluates similarities between microbes and microbial byproducts and known drugs based on their impact on host transcriptomic cellular signatures.
here we apply our framework to characterization of the antigynecologic cancer vaginal pharmacobiome.
using published vaginal microbiome multiomics data from the partners prep clinical trial we constructed vaginal epithelial gene signatures associated with each profiled vaginal microbe and metabolite.
we compared these microbiomeassociated host gene signatures to postdrug perturbation host gene signatures associated with 35 fdaapproved anticancer drugs from the library of integrated networkbased cellular signatures database to identify vaginal microbes and metabolites with high statistical and functional similarity to these drugs.
we found that lactobacilli and their metabolites can regulate host gene expression in ways similar to many anticancer drugs.
additionally we experimentally tested our model prediction that taurine a metabolite produced by l. crispatus kills cancerous breast and endometrial cancer cells.
our study shows that the pharmacobiome is a powerful framework for characterizing the anticancer therapeutic potential of vaginal microbiome factors with generalizability to other cancers microbiomes and diseases."
"the cellular accumulation of alphasynuclein as aggregates is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative diseases.
recent studies suggest that the aberrant transition of monomeric as into solidlike aggregates may occur through an intermediate liquidlike state where the protein partitions between dense and dilute phases.
although as is not typically recognized as an rnabinding protein it can bind rna under aggregation conditions but its impact on as liquidlike phases remains unexplored.
employing a combination of fluorescence spectroscopy techniques we investigated as dynamics in both phases in the presence of rna.
our analysis revealed the formation of nanoclusters involved in initiating phase separation and uncovered heterogeneity within the dense phase discovering that as molecules exist in two distinct mobility states.
additionally we demonstrated that rna induces morphological changes and promotes the liquidtosolid transition of as dense phase.
these findings underscore the active role of rna in modulating as phase transitions."
"circular rna circrna vaccines are emerging as a revolutionary strategy in cancer immunotherapy offering novel mechanisms for inducing robust and durable immune responses.
unlike traditional linear mrna vaccines circrnas exhibit exceptional stability enhanced translational efficiency and resistance to exonuclease degradation making them ideal candidates for vaccine development.
recent studies have shown that circrna vaccines play an important and specialized role in cancer treatment.
however there are currently no relevant bibliometric studies.
this study aimed to apply bibliometrics and scientometrics to summarize the knowledge structure and research hotspots regarding the role of circrna vaccines in cancer.
publications related to circrna vaccines in cancer were searched on the scopus database.
vosviewer and scopus were used to conduct the analyses.
this study summarizes the research trends and development of circrna vaccines for cancer and also a comparative analysis between mrna cancer vaccine and circrna cancer vaccine identifying potential areas of focus innovation and growth.
this information will provide a reference for researchers to studying circrna vaccines against cancer due to its increasing trends over recent times."
"subterranean rodents represent an interesting model system for molecular ecologists.
their lifestyle is associated with fragmented environments limited dispersal ability and low fecundity.
these characteristics all are expected to increase inter and intrapopulation differentiation and reduce intrapopulation genetic diversity yet the published empirical data revealed the lack of generality of this pattern.
this emphasizes the importance of accumulating more data on individual species to understand what factors shape the genetic dynamics of populations.
this study represents the first characterization of the population genetic diversity and finescale genetic structure of a highly specialized subterranean vole ellobius talpinus.
we used nine microsatellite loci and a fragment of the mitochondrial dloop to investigate genetic patterns of two distant populations the novosibirsk population at the extreme northeastern edge of the species range and the subperipheral saratov population.
as a result the two populations exhibit distinct patterns of genetic structure.
the novosibirsk population showed a low nuclear diversity with an observed heterozygosity ho of 0.34 and an unbiased expected heterozygosity uhe of 0.55. mitochondrial dloop was nearly monomorphic with over 90 of the observed haplotypes being identical resulting in a haplotype diversity hd of 0.14 and nucleotide diversity π of 0.0004. in contrast the saratov population displayed moderate nuclear ho  0.64 uhe  0.76 and high mitochondrial variation hd  0.83 π  0.034 compared to the surfacedwelling voles.
nine haplotypes representing four welldifferentiated mitochondrial clades were found in the saratov population.
in a heterogeneous landscape significant genetic differentiation was revealed at both intermediate dozens of kilometers and fine several kilometers scales.
however within the continuous suitable habitat no finescale spatial structure was observed apart from that caused by kin clustering.
the spatial genetic patterns revealed in e. talpinus appear to reflect a combination of effects of strong social structure local natural and anthropogenic barriers limiting dispersal opportunities and occasional longdistance dispersal."
 cosenior authors
"the anterior cruciate ligament acl has been recognized to have no spontaneous healing capacity after complete rupture due to an intraarticular environment.
meanwhile our group reported that a completely ruptured acl could heal spontaneously by restabilizing the femurtibia joint.
several clinical studies have recently reported that ruptured acl could heal spontaneously by controlling abnormal joint movement.
appropriate mechanical stimulation on the ruptured acl promotes spontaneous healing whereas excessive mechanical stress may inhibit the healing response.
here we investigated how much braking force to control anterior tibial translation att affects the healing response of the acl using two different braking forces for controlled att catt models.
male and female c57bl6 mice were ruptured acl and randomly classified into tightcatt loosecatt and aclrupture aclr groups.
the tightcatt group showed a higher success rate of acl healing than the loosecatt group at 4 and 8 weeks.
however collagen maturation and mechanical properties on healed acl did not differ between the tightcatt and loosecatt groups.
our results suggested that tight att braking immediately after injury is essential for successfully healing the completely ruptured acl.
on the other hand tightly att in the early healing phase was insufficient to improve mechanical strength and collagen maturation.
therefore we should control mechanical stress tightly in the early phase of acl spontaneous healing and it would be necessary to apply higher mechanical stress in the later phases to achieve greater healing of the acl."
"copynumber variable cnv genes are important in evolution and disease yet sequence variation in cnv genes are a blindspot for largescale studies.
we present a method ctyper that leverages pangenomes to produce copynumber maps with allelespecific sequences containing locally phased variants of cnv genes from ngs reads.
we extensively characterized accuracy and efficiency on a database of 3351 cnv genes including hla smn and cyp2d6 as well as 212 noncnv medicallyrelevant challenging genes.
the genotypes capture 96.5 of underlying variants in new genomes requiring 0.9 seconds per gene.
expression analysis of ctyper genotypes explains more variance than known eqtl variants.
comparing allelespecific expression quantified divergent expression on 7.94 of paralogs and tissuespecific biases on 4.7 of paralogs.
we found reduced expression of smn1 converted from smn2 which potentially affects diagnosis of spinal muscular atrophy and increased expression of a duplicative translocation of amy2b.
overall ctyper enables biobankscale genotyping of cnv and challenging genes."
"ikarugamycin is a member of the natural product family of the polycyclic tetramate macrolactams potems.
the compound exhibits a diverse range of biological activities including antimicrobial antiprotozoal antileukemic and antiinflammatory properties.
in addition it interferes with several crucial cellular functions such as oxidized lowdensity lipoprotein uptake in macrophages nefinduced cd4 cell surface downregulation and mechanisms of endocytosis.
it is therefore used as a tool compound to study diverse biological processes.
however ikarugamycin commercial prices are very high with up to 1300 € per 1 mg thus limiting its application.
we therefore set out to develop a highyielding recombinant production platform of ikarugamycin by screening different expression vectors recombinant host strains and cultivation conditions.
overall this has led to overproduction levels of more than 100 mgl which together with a straightforward purification protocol establishes biotechnological access to affordable ikarugamycin enabling its increased use in biomedical research in the future."
"objective to determine the downstream effects on ovarian function and immune cell differentiation in the ovary and uterus using a model in which rgs2 was knocked out specifically in cd4 t cells.
design laboratory based experiments with female mice.
animals female congenic fully backcrossed and noncongenic mixed strain mice with cd4 t cellspecific rgs2 knockout.
exposure fourweekold female cd4 rgs2 knockout cd4 rgs2ko mice and their littermate controls cd4 rgs2ctl were subjected to superovulation using pregnant mare serum gonadotropins.
main outcome measures oocyte numbers lymphocyte populations in the ovary and uterus and serum estradiol and progesterone concentrations.
results in noncongenic mixed strain mice cd4 rgs2 knockout ko promoted higher oocyte ovulation and increased uterine total leukocyte numbers.
similarly congenic fully backcrossed strain mice showed higher oocyte numbers and increased uterine total leukocytes in the cd4 rgs2ko mice compared to cd4 rgs2ctl mice.
proinflammatory cd4 t helper th 1 and th17 cell frequencies in the ovary and uterus were unchanged while treg and th2 cell frequencies were elevated along with increased concentrations of estradiol and progesterone in the serum of cd4 rgs2ko mice.
conclusion our study highlights the important role of rgs2 in cd4 t cells within the context of reproduction.
the dysregulation of immune responses due to rgs2 knockout in cd4 t cells appears to enhance oocyte production.
further research is warranted to elucidate the precise mechanisms by which rgs2 influences reproductive outcomes including its impact on fecundability endometrial receptivity and successful implantation."
"curcumin a polyphenolic compound derived from the plant  l. has demonstrated a wide range of therapeutic properties including potential anticancer effects.
however its clinical efficacy is limited due to poor bioavailability and stability.
to overcome these challenges curcumin analogs like ef24 have been developed with improved pharmacological properties.
in this study we used wholetranscriptome profiling to identify the genomewide functional impacts of ef24 treatment in leukemia cells to improve our understanding of its potential mechanisms of action.
this approach allowed us to establish a model system for associating druggable genes with clinical disease targets.
we used the chronic myeloid leukemia cml cell line k562 and acute myeloid leukemia aml cell lines hl60 kasumi1 and thp1 to conduct ef24 treatment studies.
cell viability was significantly decreased in the ef24treated cells as compared to the untreated controls.
we discovered that the genes atf3 clu hspa6 osgin1 zfand2a and cxcl8 which are associated with reduced cell viability and proliferation were consistently upregulated in all ef24treated cell lines.
further analysis of the tested cell lines revealed the activation of various signaling pathways including the stat1 regulated s100 family signaling pathway that controlled downstream gene expression in response to ef24 treatment.
our results elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying ef24s antitumor efficacy against leukemia highlighting its multifaceted impact on signaling pathways and gene networks that regulate cell survival proliferation and immune responses in myeloid leukemia cells."
"a hallmark of αsynucleinopathies e.g.
parkinson disease is the misfolding and aggregation of αsynuclein in tissues and biological fluids.
protein amplification assays like realtime quakinginduced conversion rtquic are sensitive yet currently limited to semiinvasive sample types such as cerebrospinal fluid because more accessible samples such as blood contain inhibitors.
here we show that nanoparticleenhanced quakinginduced conversion nanoquic can double the speed of reactions spiked with misfolded αsynuclein while increasing sensitivity 100fold in human plasma.
nanoquic detected spike concentrations down to 90 pgml in lysed whole blood while reactions without nanoparticles rtquic failed to have any detection due to the presence of strong inhibitors.
moreover nanoquic showed increased seeding activity in plasma samples from parkinson disease patients n4 versus healthy controls n4.
this sets the groundwork for the noninvasive diagnostic use of nanoquic potentially enabling early disease detection and management through bloodbased testing."
"purpose recent research has explored regionspecific responses within the biceps femoris long head.
however evidence regarding regional muscle activation remains controversial primarily because information derived solely from surface electromyograms semg amplitude does not necessarily provide an accurate estimate of neural drive to the muscle.
to address this limitation this study investigated whether there are proximodistal differences in the motor unit properties of the biceps femoris long head during isometric hip extension and knee flexion tasks.
methods seventeen resistancetrained males performed isometric knee flexion and hip extension tasks at 20 and 40 of maximal voluntary contraction.
highdensity semg were recorded from the proximal and distal regions of the biceps femoris long head and decomposed into individual motor units.
central motor unit properties mean discharge rate discharge rate variability recruitment and derecruitment thresholds and peripheral properties motor unit action potential amplitude and conduction velocity were analyzed.
bipolar semg amplitude was also calculated for each region to simulate traditional semg measurements.
results bipolar semg amplitude motor unit action potential amplitude and conduction velocity were significantly greater in the distal region during both tasks.
in contrast no proximodistal differences were observed in central motor unit properties.
conclusion these findings suggest that the increased bipolar semg amplitude in the distal region of the biceps femoris long head is driven by peripheral motor unit properties rather than differences in central modulation likely influenced by intramuscular variations in muscle mechanics.
this emphasizes the limitations of relying solely on semg amplitude to infer neural control strategies."
"highthroughput experiments in plants are hindered by long generation times and high costs.
to address these challenges we present an optimized pipeline for"
"hprotein is part of the multiprotein glycine cleavage system found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
the arabidopsis thaliana genome contains three loci for genes encoding hprotein.
we show that in land plants there are two clades of mitochondrial hproteins one that clusters with h1 and h3 and another that clusters with h2 an isoform mostly expressed in heterotrophic tissue and for which a null mutation results in a 99 impeded growth.
after showing that all three isoforms fulfill the same metabolic function we evidenced that the impaired root growth in h2 results from an altered cell cycle progression concomitant to a lower target of rapamycin kinase activity.
subsequent metabolomic approaches revealed an accumulation of storage sugars and a significant decrease of the tca intermediates and several vitamins in the h2 root cells as compared to the wildtype ones.
additional investigations evidenced that h2 acts as the main relay for lipoylation in root mitochondria which diverges from the current lipoylation model proposed for photosynthetic tissues.
together this work provides new insight on the control of the cell cycle by mitochondrial metabolism and also challenges the current dogma for lipoylation in mitochondria of plant cells."
"explaining missing heritability in rare disorders requires effective methods to interpret genetic variants.
sequencetofunction models such as spliceai support discovery of splice altering variants but filtering their output to identify pathogenic mutations remains challenging.
we developed splipath to address 2 unmet needs in this process.
first splipath links the output of spliceai with reference transcriptomics data.
this allows users to identify genetic variants that induce unannotated splice isoforms selectively expressed in disease models or patient tissue.
second splipath aggregates variants with similar functional consequences into collapsed splicing quantitative trait loci csqtls for more powerful genetic association analyses.
we first used splipath to annotate whole genome sequencing wgs of 9467 als patients and controls using rnaseq data from an ipsc model of tdp43 dysfunction.
through this splipath identified 53 variants predicted to enhance cryptic exon ce retention events associated with a core als pathomechanism.
we then applied splipath to 294 als patients where both wgs and rnaseq were available and discovered missing genetic risk in the known als gene kif5a.
this revealed a first of kind intronic mutation hotspot that was validated using minigene reporter assays.
finally using the same rnaseq data we then predicted 754 candidate csqtl for an independent wgs cohort of 6625 als patients and 2472 controls.
unbiased genomewide csqtl association testing successfully recovered kif5a and nominated epg5 as a potential pathogenic gene.
these effects were undetectable using simplistic spliceai gene burden tests.
collectively our study demonstrates the utility of splipath for uncovering missing heritability in rare disorders."
"many immunotherapies focus on reinvigorating cd8 t cell anticancer responses and different nuclear imaging techniques have been developed to measure cd8 t cell distributions.
in vivo labeling approaches using radiotracers primarily show cd8 t cell distributions while ex vivo labeled cd8 t cells can show cd8 t cell migration patterns homing and tumor infiltration.
currently a comprehensive headtohead comparison of in vivo and ex vivo cell labeling with respect to their tumor and normal tissue targeting properties and correlation to the presence of cd8 t cells is lacking yet essential for correct interpretation of clinical cd8 imaging applications.
therefore we performed a headtohead comparison of three different cd8 t cell imaging approaches 1 zrlabeled dfoconjugated fcsilent anticd8 antibody zrzranticd8igg2a 2 ex vivo zroxine labeled ovalbuminspecific cd8 t cells zrzroti cells and 3 flabeled il2 falfrescail2.
methods
b16f10ova tumorbearing c57bl6 mice n10group received intravenously one of the three radiopharmaceuticals.
petct images were acquired starting 72 h zrzranticd8igg2a 24 and 48 h zrzroti cells and 10 min falfrescail2 post injection.
subsequently ex vivo biodistribution analysis of the radiopharmaceuticals was performed followed by flow cytometric analysis to evaluate the number of intratumoral cd8 t cells.
additionally the intratumoral radiolabel distributions was assessed by autoradiography and immunohistochemistry ihc on tumor slices.
results
zrzranticd8igg2a zrzroti cells and falfrescail2 showed uptake in cd8rich tissues with preferential targeting to the spleen.
biodistribution analysis showed tumor uptake above blood level for all radiopharmaceuticals except falfrescail2.
for all three approaches the uptake in the tumordraining lymph node was significantly higher compared with the contralateral axial lymph node suggesting that all approaches allow evaluation of immune responses involving cd8 t cells.
tumor uptake of zrzranticd8igg2a r0.65 p0.01 and zrzroti cells r0.74 p0.01 correlated to the number of intratumoral cd8 t cells flow cytometry.
the intratumoral distribution pattern of the radiosignal was different for ex vivo and in vivo radiolabeling techniques.
the short halflife of f precluded autoradiography assessment of falfrescail2.
conclusion
we show that zrzranticd8igg2a and zrzroti cells petct imaging can be used to evaluate intratumoral cd8 t cells even though their normal tissues and intratumoral distribution patterns are significantly different.
based on their characteristics zrzranticd8igg2a might be most useful to immunophenotyping the tme while the ex vivo cell labeling approach visualizes cd8 t cell migrations patterns and the permissiveness of tumors for invasion whereas falfrescail2 allows for rapid recurrent imaging and might prove useful for tracking rapid changes in cd8 t cell distributions.
in conclusion our headtohead comparison of the three prototype cd8"
in recent decades the mediterranean sea has experienced a marked escalation in the introduction of nonnative and invasive marine species.
"giant hummingbirds  spp.
are extraordinarily large hummingbirds whose taxonomy has been muddled for two centuries.
systematics were recently redefined in a study of migration physiology and genomics revealing two species the southern giant hummingbird and northern giant hummingbird.
here we reevaluate taxonomy and nomenclature of the genus in light of its newlyclarified biology and species limits analyzing data from 608 specimens and wildcaught individuals spanning 1864–2023.
the forms  and  were both described based on multiple syntypes.
no adequate syntypes for  are extant so we designate a neotype for this taxon.
we then critically consider the identity and usage of  and  respectively and examine identification challenges that have fostered taxonomic uncertainty.
we endorse the names  for the southern giant hummingbird and  for the northern giant hummingbird.
the genetic identity of the  lectotype remains untested but its plumage appears to match the northern species.
we found that ∼33 of  specimens in major museum collections are misidentified as  we provide this list to correct the historical record.
to facilitate identification and future study of these two cryptic species we provide comprehensive information on plumage measurements and seasonal ranges."
"african swine fever asf is a viral hemorrhagic disease of swine that is reportable to the world organisation for animal health.
since 2007 asf has been expanding globally and caused severe disruption to the global swine industry.
in 2021 asf was detected in the dominican republic prompting an emergency response from local and international officials.
nearly three years later asf is still present in the country despite control efforts.
this study used data from january 2023march 2024 from governmentmandated sampling of commercial farms a newly initiated active surveillance program of backyard farms and passive reports to provide a comprehensive and descriptive assessment of asf in the dominican republic.
the attack rate for each region was calculated and the reproductive ratio r0 was estimated using the doubling time method.
asf continues to be distributed throughout the dominican republic with lower attack rates in central regions and r0 nearing 1. these results suggest that asf in the country is reaching a stable state that does not resemble an epidemic situation.
this may suggest the need to change from an approach of emergency response to one of sustained and progressive control ultimately for the longterm goal of asf eradication in the dominican republic."
a route to prepare ribonucleoside triphosphates featuring a 3’aminoxy 3’onh
"the work is devoted to solving an important scientific task of determining the spread and harmfulness of broomrape its racial composition and developing measures to protect sunflower from this parasite.
the aim of the research was to determine the resistance of sunflower hybrids to the broomrape parasite.
during the research a vegetation experiment was used to determine the racial composition of the parasite and the resistance of different sunflower hybrids to it.
sunflower hybrids were evaluated for resistance to broomrape in soil culture using a modified method and the roll method of seed germination.
from the northern steppe of ukraine broomrape is actively moving to the central northern and western regions of the country.
the practical value of the work is to determine the resistance of sunflower hybrids to broomrape.
differentiation of sunflower hybrids grown by resistance to the parasite was carried out.
it has been observed that the broomrape population exhibits a significant level of virulence capable of overcoming the immunity found in the most resilient foreignbred hybrids resistant to e f and g races of this parasite.
the appearance of highly aggressive new races of broomrape e f g and h in the foreststeppe and polissya regions underscores the crucial necessity to address the challenge of developing breeding material resistant to these novel races of the parasitic plant.
this entails an indepth exploration of the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying sunflower resistance to the pathogen.
the widespread buildup of parasite races e f g and h in sunflower crops is linked to the disruption of crop rotations and the extensive cultivation of hybrids of this crop.
these hybrids are primarily resistant to races 5 e and 6 f of the parasite.
the results of the research can be used in the regions farms for successful protection against broomrape as well as in breeding programs to create sunflower hybrids resistant to new races of the parasite and corn hybrids that cause better germination of seeds of this pathogen in the soil and their death by their root secretions.
keywords race root system root secretions identification parasite."
"genomewide association studies gwas have identified over 300 loci associated with the inflammatory bowel diseases ibd but putative causal genes for most are unknown.
we conducted the largest diseasefocused expression quantitative trait loci eqtl analysis using colon tissue from 252 ibd patients to determine genetic effects on gene expression and potential contribution to ibd.
combined with two nonibd colon eqtl studies we identified 194 potential target genes for 108 gwas loci.
eqtl in ibd tissue were enriched for ibd gwas loci colocalizations provided novel evidence for ibdassociated genes such as abo and tnfrsf14 and identified additional target genes compared to nonibd tissue eqtl.
ibdassociated eqtl unique to diseased tissue had distinct regulatory and functional characteristics with increased effect sizes.
together these highlight the importance of eqtl studies in diseased tissue for understanding functional consequences of genetic variants and elucidating molecular mechanisms and regulation of key genes involved in ibd."
"copynumber variable cnv genes are important in evolution and disease yet sequence variation in cnv genes are a blindspot for largescale studies.
we present a method ctyper that leverages pangenomes to produce copynumber maps with allelespecific sequences containing locally phased variants of cnv genes from ngs reads.
we extensively characterized accuracy and efficiency on a database of 3351 cnv genes including hla smn and cyp2d6 as well as 212 noncnv medicallyrelevant challenging genes.
the genotypes capture 96.5 of underlying variants in new genomes requiring 0.9 seconds per gene.
expression analysis of ctyper genotypes explains more variance than known eqtl variants.
comparing allelespecific expression quantified divergent expression on 7.94 of paralogs and tissuespecific biases on 4.7 of paralogs.
we found reduced expression of smn1 converted from smn2 which potentially affects diagnosis of spinal muscular atrophy and increased expression of a duplicative translocation of amy2b.
overall ctyper enables biobankscale genotyping of cnv and challenging genes."
"extracellular vesicles evs are membranederived vesicles continuously shed by cells into the extracellular space.
with cargos containing nucleic acids and other proteins evs play key roles in intercellular communication and other biological processes and are widely regarded as promising biomarkers for disease detection.
evs are abundantly found in virtually every biofluid including blood urine and saliva.
while there are numerous technologies to isolate evs in blood and urine isolating evs from saliva remains a challenge as it is highly complex and heterogeneous—cells debris and other proteins can all inhibit the isolation of evs by traditional platforms.
here we employ the candycollect a lollipopinspired sampling device with open microfluidic channels as a noninvasive and patientfriendly alternative for the capture of salivary evs.
the candycollect simplifies sample preparation by effectively preconcentrating evs on the device surface before evs are eluted off of the candycollect labeled with cholesteroltagged oligonucleotides and subsequently detected by qpcr with primers specific for the tagged oligos to enumerate the relative number of evs.
we demonstrate that downstream ev cargo analysis can be performed using simoa.
overall the candycollect ushers a new method to capture enumerate and analyze salivary evs."
"understanding the relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning stands as a cornerstone in ecological research.
extensive evidence now underscores the profound impact of species loss on the stability and dynamics of ecosystem functions.
however it remains unclear whether the loss of genetic diversity within key species yield similar consequences.
here we delve into the intricate relationship between species diversity genetic diversity and ecosystem functions across three trophic levels primary producers primary consumers and secondary consumers in natural aquatic ecosystems.
our investigation involves estimating species diversity and genomewide diversity gauged within three pivotal species within each trophic level evaluating seven key ecosystem functions and analyzing the strength of the relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functions befs.
we found that overall the absolute effect size of genetic diversity on ecosystem functions mirrors that of species diversity in natural ecosystems.
we nonetheless unveil a striking dichotomy while genetic diversity was positively correlated with various ecosystem functions species diversity displays a negative correlation with these functions.
these intriguing antagonist effects of species and genetic diversity persists across the three trophic levels underscoring its systemic nature but were apparent only when befs were assessed within trophic levels rather than across them.
this study reveals the complexity of predicting the consequences of genetic and species diversity loss under natural conditions and emphasizes the need for further mechanistic models integrating these two facets of biodiversity."
"liquid chromatographymass spectrometry lcms based proteomics particularly in the bottomup approach relies on the digestion of proteins into peptides for subsequent separation and analysis.
the most prevalent method for identifying peptides from datadependent acquisition dda mass spectrometry data is database search.
traditional tools typically focus on identifying a single peptide per tandem mass spectrum ms2 often neglecting the frequent occurrence of peptide cofragmentations leading to chimeric spectra.
here we introduce msfraggerdda a novel database search algorithm that enhances peptide identification by detecting cofragmented peptides with high sensitivity and speed.
utilizing msfraggers fragment ion indexing algorithm msfraggerdda performs a comprehensive search within the full isolation window for each ms2 followed by robust feature detection filtering and rescoring procedures to refine search results.
evaluation against established tools across diverse datasets demonstrated that integrated within the fragpipe computational platform msfraggerdda significantly increases identification sensitivity while maintaining stringent false discovery rate fdr control.
it is also uniquely suited for widewindow acquisition wwa data.
msfraggerdda provides an efficient and accurate solution for peptide identification enhancing the detection of lowabundance cofragmented peptides.
coupled with the fragpipe platform msfraggerdda enables more comprehensive and accurate analysis of proteomics data."
"endogenous phospholipids influence the conformational equilibria of g proteincoupled receptors regulating their ability to bind drugs and form signaling complexes.
however most studies of gpcrlipid interactions have been carried out in mixed micelles or lipid nanodiscs.
though useful these membrane mimetics do not fully replicate the physical properties of native cellular membranes associated with large assemblies of lipids.
we investigated the conformational equilibria of the human a"
"niemann–pick disease type c npc is a devastating lysosomal storage disease characterized by abnormal cholesterol accumulation in lysosomes.
currently there is no treatment for npc.
transcription factor eb tfeb a member of the microphthalmia transcriptional factors mitf has emerged as a master regulator of lysosomal function promoting the clearance of substrates stored in cells.
however it is not known whether tfeb plays a role in cholesterol clearance in npc disease.
here we show that transgenic overexpression of tfeb but not tfe3 another member of mitf family facilitates cholesterol clearance in npc1 cell models.
here we show that pharmacological activation of tfeb by sulforaphane sfn a previously identified natural smallmolecule tfeb agonist by us can dramatically ameliorate cholesterol accumulation in human and mouse npc1 cell models.
in npc1 cells sfn induces tfeb nuclear translocation and upregulates the expression of tfebdownstream genes promoting lysosomal exocytosis and biogenesis.
while genetic inhibition of tfeb abolishes the cholesterol clearance and exocytosis effect by sfn.
in the npc mouse model sfn dephosphorylatesactivates tfeb in brain and exhibits potent"
"the intricate dynamics of volatile organic compounds vocs in the human respiratory system remain poorly understood.
in the present study we integrate odor sensory tests osts coupled with computational fluid dynamics and a physiologically based pharmacokinetic cfdpbpk model to elucidate various aspects of the olfaction process.
safe yogurtderived substances were incorporated in osts to prevent harmful exposure.
acetaldehyde was identified as a key active component in determining odor intensity prompting further analysis of acetone and other four constituents of yogurt.
logarithmic correlations were established between the perceived odor intensity from the osts and both timeaveraged absorption flux and equilibrium concentration within the olfactory mucus layer.
these parameters were numerically captured enabling the logarithmic approximation of odor intensity for different breathing profiles and the development of reliable prediction models for odor sensation based on quantifiable physiological parameters.
the cfdpbpk model captured detailed spatial and temporal variations of these parameters which offers potential for future integratedinsilico applications.
minor peaks of odor concentration were observed in the posterior olfactory regions during exhalation revealing a retronasal phenomenon.
locationspecific analysis revealed the nostrils and olfactory regions as the most accurate indicators of perceived odor intensity proving the limitations of rough sensory assessments in the indoorbreathing zone scales.
acetone exhibited distinct absorption and desorption trends during the transitional phase between inhalation and exhalation owing to the physical properties diffusion and partition coefficients that strongly characterize the olfaction dynamics."
"the ribosomeassociated uality ontrol rqc pathway resolves stalled ribosomes.
as part of rqc stalled nascent polypeptide chains ncs are appended with rboxy"
"the structure of compound eyes in arthropods has been the subject of many studies revealing important biological principles.
however until recently these studies were constrained by the twodimensional nature of available ultrastructural data.
here by taking advantage of the novel threedimensional ultrastructural dataset obtained using volume electron microscopy vem we present the first cellularlevel reconstruction of the whole compound eye of an insect the extremely miniaturized parasitoid wasp"
"cell competition is a fitness control mechanism in tissues where less fit cells are eliminated to maintain tissue homeostasis.
two primary mechanisms of cell elimination have been identified in cell competition studies contactdependent cell death and mechanical compressiondriven apoptosis.
while both occur in tissues their combined impact on population dynamics is unclear.
here we develop a cellbased computational model to study competition between two cell types with differing physical properties.
the model integrates cellular mechanics with cellcycle dynamics contactinduced apoptosis and cell extrusion via mechanical stress.
using this model we explored how differences in physical traits between cell types influence competitive interactions.
our findings show that differences in cell compressibility alone can drive mechanical competition with stiffer cells outcompeting softer ones in otherwise identical populations.
surprisingly mutations that reduce cell stiffness combined with decreased contact inhibition of proliferation can create a soft supercompetitive mutant.
we demonstrate that changes in apoptosis sensitivity cell adhesion and cell size significantly affect growth potential and susceptibility to apoptosis.
furthermore mutant cell colonies require a critical colony size dependent on cell compressibility to overtake the surrounding wildtype tissue.
for colonies below the critical size the elimination process is stochastic driven by a protrusive fingerlike instability in the interface between two cells that promote invasion of the supercompetitors."
"two related methods have been widely used to test animals capacity to reason by exclusion calls 2004 2cups task where subjects choose between two cups in which one reward was hidden and the empty cup is revealed and premack  premacks task 1994 where one reward goes in each of the two cups and one reward is removed.
in both cases success is identifying the cup with the reward.
it has been suggested that among corvids the demands associated with caching may foster exclusion abilities by reinforcing the experience of relevant contraries e.g.
empty vs. full or by supporting domain general capacities that support caching and exclusion inferences.
however shaw et al.
2013 found that eurasian jays proficient cachers failed a version of calls 2cups task.
to further test the caching hypothesis we amended the procedure using invisible displacement to hide rewards removing aspects of shaw et al.s procedure that may have masked competence of eurasian jays.
we tested seven eurasian jays who showed spontaneous success on both calls 1rewardshowempty 80 correct and premack and premacks 2rewardremove1 85 correct.
these results align with the hypothesis that corvids exclusion reasoning is related to caching behaviour."
"peptides are widely used in biomaterials due to their easy of synthesis ability to signal cells and modify the properties of biomaterials.
a key benefit of using peptides is that they are natural substrates for cellsecreted enzymes which creates the possibility of utilizing cellsecreted enzymes for tuning cellmaterial interactions.
however these enzymes can also induce unwanted degradation of bioactive peptides in biomaterials or in peptide therapies.
liquid chromatographymass spectrometry lcms is a widely used powerful methodology that can separate complex mixtures of molecules and quantify numerous analytes within a single run.
there are several challenges in using lcms for the multiplexed quantification of cellinduced peptide degradation including the need for nondegradable internal standards and the identification of optimal sample storage conditions.
another problem is that cell culture media and biological samples typically contain both proteins and lipids that can accumulate on chromatography columns and degrade their performance.
however removing these constituents can be expensive time consuming and increases sample variability.
here we show that directly injecting samples onto the lcms without any purification enables rapid and accurate quantification of peptide concentration and that hundreds of lcms runs can be done on a single column without a significantly diminish the ability to quantify the degradation of peptide libraries.
we also show that column failure is evident when hydrophilic peptides fail to be retained on the column and this can be easily identified using standard peptide mixtures for column benchmarking.
in total this work introduces a simple and effective method for simultaneously quantifying the degradation of dozens of peptides in cell culture.
by providing a streamlined and costeffective method for the direct quantification of peptide degradation in complex biological samples this work enables more efficient assessment of peptide stability and functionality facilitating the development of advanced biomaterials and peptidebased therapies."
"pain is the hallmark symptom of osteoarthritis oa and its biological drivers remain poorly understood.
while the role of innate immunity in oa has been extensively studied the involvement of adaptive immunity in particular regulatory t cells tregs is not well understood.
using a comprehensive multiomic approach on the peripheral blood from 46 knee oa patients with similar radiographic stage including deep immunophenotyping cytokine profiling transcriptomic and tcell receptor analysis on sorted cd4 tregs and effector t cells teffs we identified an immunological signature associated with oarelated pain.
cytokines promoting treg expansion and activation with increases of sil2ra stnfr1 stnfr2 were correlated with the western ontario and mcmaster universities arthritis index womac pain subscore suggesting a potential treg dysfunction.
nineteen t cell subsets were correlated with womac pain.
notably we found a negative correlation of cell subsets associated with treg expansion and activation foxp3ctla4 cd4cd57 treg cd95 cd4 treg cd45ra.
differential gene expression analysis between patients with low and high womac pain intensity threshold of 40100 revealed an upregulation of inflammasomerelated genes such as il1rl1 il31ra ifitm3 nlrp3 ifng in tregs.
functional enrichment analysis highlighted an overrepresentation of innate immune response il8 and interferon activation pathways suggesting a proinflammatory state in tregs of patients with high pain intensity.
collectively our systems immunology approach highlights multiple associations between treg dysfunctionality and oarelated pain providing new insights into the adaptive immune systems contribution to oarelated pain."
"purpose cadmium cd contamination in agricultural soil and accumulation in rice poses serious threat to human health.
it is reported that selenium se can mitigate the toxic effect of cd in rice.
but the underlying mechanism of se preventing the cd accumulation and restoring the micronutrient content in rice grains have not been studied before.
therefore our main aim is to reduce cd content and restore micronutrient content in rice grain and study the mechanism.
methods two indigenous rice genotypes maharaj and jamini were exposed to 10 and 50 micromolar cd in presence and absence of se 5 micromolar with a control set and assessed for plant growth biomass cd content ros and antioxidants for cd induced toxicity and amelioration.
genes for micronutrient transporters were studied by rtpcr.
grain cd and micronutrient content and agronomic parameters were also studied.
results se supplementation increased plant growth biomass and yield under cd stress.
sem and edx analysis revealed that secd complex formed on root surfaces restricted cd uptake by the roots preventing root damage.
soil analysis confirmed that se decreased cd bioavailability restricted root to shoot cd translocation ultimately reducing cd accumulation and restoring micronutrients in grain.
this was further validated by fluorescent leadmium dye staining.
in secd treated seedlings upregulation of s metabolism and nutrient transporter genes also contributed to the mitigation of cd stress.
conclusions so the se supplementation can be considered as a costeffective ecofriendly and sustainable approach to produce cd free rice cultivation in cd polluted soil."
"gastrointestinal gi b cells and plasma cells pcs critical to mucosal homeostasis play an important role in the host response to hiv1 infection.
here high resolution mapping of human b cells and pcs from colon and ileum during both viremic and suppressed hiv1 infection identified a significant reduction in germinal center gc b cells and follicular dendritic cells fdcs during hiv1 viremia.
further iga pcs the major cellular output of intestinal gcs were significantly reduced during viremic hiv1 infection.
pcassociated transcriptional perturbations including type i interferon signaling persisted in antiretroviral therapy art treated individuals suggesting ongoing disruption of the intestinal immune milieu during art.
gi humoral immune perturbations associated with changes in intestinal microbiome composition and systemic inflammation.
herein we highlight a key immune defect in the gi mucosa due to hiv1 viremia with major implications."
"the mining of genomes across life has unearthed a bounty of biosynthetic potential to diverse molecules key to a biobased future.
while the heterologous expression of metabolic pathways has achieved broad success most approaches suffer a similar fate in low initial production levels that require extensive resourceheavy iterative strain engineering refinement.
herein we introduce a growthcoupled biosynthetic growbio strategy that irrevocably connects microbial growth with specialized compound production.
we demonstrate the plugandplay versatility of growbio in the production of the structurally complex animal biopigment xanthommatin a colorchanging ommochrome with material and cosmetic potential.
xanthommatin biosynthesis directly fuels growth of a newly designed  510methylenetetrahydrofolate auxotroph puma.
aided by genomescale metabolic modeling puma was designed and built to be controlled by endogenous formate coproduced as a coupled biosynthetic byproduct in the multistep conversion of tryptophan to xanthommatin.
adaptive laboratory evolution was utilized to streamline xanthommatin’s gramscale bioproduction via growth rate selection establishing growbio as a promising biotechnological approach for establishing and optimizing the microbial production of valueadded molecules."
" is a major opportunistic human pathogen which causes both noninvasive and invasive disease.
the  type b hib vaccine has led to a significant reduction of invasive hib disease but offers no protection against colonisation or disease by nontypeables nt or nonb serotypes and  remains a public health burden worldwide with increasing reports of multidrug resistance mdr.
despite this there is no comprehensive understanding of the species global population structure.
here we wholegenome sequenced 4000 isolates of  from an unvaccinated paediatric carriage and pneumonia cohort from northwestern thailand.
despite no hib immunisation serotype b was uncommonly found while 91.7 of isolates were nt.
we identified a large number of nearly panresistant lineages and discovered that no lineages were enriched among disease samples suggesting the ability to cause invasive disease is not restricted to any subpopulation.
population genetic analyses of our data combined with nearly 6000 published genomes revealed a highly admixed population structure low core genome nucleotide diversity and evidence of pervasive negative selection.
global isolates confirm that mdr lineages are not confined to our newlysequenced dataset and their establishment globally is an urgent concern."
"the heterogeneity of epithelialtomesenchymal transition emt programs is manifest in the diverse emtlike phenotypes occurring during tumor progression.
however little is known about the mechanistic basis and functional role of specific forms of emt in cancer.
here we address this question in lung adenocarcinoma luad cells that enter a dormancy period in response to tgfβ upon disseminating to distant sites.
luad cells with the capacity to enter dormancy are characterized by expression of sox2 and nkx21 primitive progenitor markers.
in these cells tgfβ induces growth inhibition accompanied by a full emt response that subsequently transitions into an atypical mesenchymal state of round morphology and lacking actin stress fibers.
tgfβ induces this transition by driving the expression of the actindepolymerizing factor gelsolin which changes a migratory stress fiberrich mesenchymal phenotype into a cortical actinrich spheroidal state.
this transition lowers the biomechanical stiffness of metastatic progenitors protecting them from killing by mechanosensitive cytotoxic t lymphocytes ctls and natural killer nk cells.
inhibiting this actin depolymerization process clears tissues of dormant metastatic cells.
thus luad primitive progenitors undergo an atypical emt as part of a strategy to evade immunemediated elimination during dormancy.
our results provide a mechanistic basis and functional role of this atypical emt response of luad metastatic progenitors and further illuminate the role of tgfβ as a crucial driver of immune evasive metastatic dormancy."
"immunoglobulin a iga is the most abundant antibody isotype produced across mammals and plays a specialized role in mucosal homeostasis.
constantly secreted into the lumen of the intestine iga binds commensal microbiota to regulate their colonization and function with unclear implications for health.
iga deficiency is common in humans but is difficult to study due to its complex aetiology and comorbidities.
using genetically and environmentally controlled mice here we show that igadeficient animals have increased susceptibility to endogenous colorectal tumours.
cellular and molecular analyses revealed that in the absence of iga colonic epithelial cells induce antibacterial factors and accelerate cell cycling in response to the microbiota.
oral treatment with iga was sufficient to both reduce steadystate proliferation and protect mice from tumours but this function was due to antibody structure rather than binding specificity.
in both organoid and monolayer culture systems iga directly suppressed epithelial growth.
coimmunoprecipitation mass spectrometry and a targeted crispr screen identified dmbt1 as an igabinding epithelial surface protein required for igamediated suppression of proliferation.
together iga and dmbt1 regulate notch signalling and tune the normal cycling of absorptive colonocyte progenitors.
in mice deleting the transmembrane and cytoplasmic signalling portions of dmbt1 or blocking notch signalling was sufficient to reverse both the increased proliferation and tumour susceptibility of iga knockouts.
these experiments establish a homeostatic function for iga in tempering physiological epithelial responses to microbiota to maintain mucosal health."
"competition for food and reproductive interference negative interspecific sexual interactions have been identified as major drivers of species exclusion.
still how these biotic interactions jointly determine competitive dominance remains largely unknown.
we tackle this by coupling population models and laboratory experiments with two spider mite sibling species.
using experiments specifically designed to measure the single and combined effects of food competition and reproductive interference we first show that the strength and symmetry of reproductive interference between species changes in presence of food competition.
next we show that population models incorporating each type of interaction alone or their effects when combined lead to markedly different predictions from exclusion by one species or the other to exclusion of the less abundant species.
moreover accounting for the observed reduction in the strength of reproductive interference in the presence of food competition changes the threshold frequency determining the dominant competitor favouring the superior competitor for food.
finally model predictions for shortterm population dynamics were corroborated with an independent population cage experiment.
altogether our results suggest that trophic interactions can modulate sexual interactions significantly impacting population dynamics and competitive outcomes.
hence the joint consideration of food competition and reproductive interference is critical to accurately predict and understand species coexistence."
"premise pectocarya recurvata boraginaceae a native species of the sonoran desert has served as an important model system for a suite of ecological and evolutionary studies.
despite its relevance as an ecoevolutionary model no reference genome assemblies in the cynoglossoideae subfamily have been published.
methods using pacbio hifi sequencing we assembled a reference genome for p. recurvata and annotated coding regions with fulllength transcripts from an isoseq transcriptome library.
we assessed genome completeness with busco and used flow cytometry and kmer analysis to estimate the genome size of p. recurvata.
results the chromosomescale reference genome assembly for p. recurvata was 216.0 mbp long with a contig n50 of 12.1 mbp.
our assembly included 12 primary contigs bounded by telomeres at all ends but one consistent with the 12 chromosomes documented for the species.
the chromosomes covered 158.3 mbp and contained 30655 predicted genes.
our measured haploid genome size from the same population was 386.5 mbp among the smallest for boraginaceae.
genomic analyses suggested that this may reflect a recent autotetraploid such that predicted diploid genome size would be even smaller and similar to the assembly size.
discussion the p. recurvata assembly and annotation provide a highquality genomic resource in a sparsely represented area of the angiosperm phylogeny.
our new genome will enable future ecophysiology biogeography and phylogenetics research."
"the emc complex is a highly conserved transmembrane chaperone located in the endoplasmic reticulum er.
this complex has been associated in humans with sterol homeostasis and a myriad of different cellular activities making the mechanism of emc functionality enigmatic.
using fission yeast we demonstrate that emc assists biogenesis of the sterol transfer protein lam6ltc1 at the erplasma membrane and ermitochondria contact sites.
cells losing emc function sequester unfolded lam6ltc1 and other proteins at the mitochondrial matrix driving to surplus ergosterol coldsensitive growth and mitochondrial disfunctions.
remarkably inhibition of the ergosterol biosynthesis but also fluidization of cell membranes to counteract its rigidizing effects reduce the erunfolded protein response and rescue growth and mitochondrial defects in emcdeficient cells.
these results indicate that emcassisted biogenesis of lam6ltc1 provides through ergosterol homeostasis optimal membrane fluidity to facilitate biogenesis of other ermembrane proteins."
"using children’s drawings to understand children’s concept learning has been proven to be an effective method but there are still two major problems in previous research 1. the drawings heavily relies on the task so the ecological validity of the conclusions is low 2. the subjective interpretation of drawings is inevitable.
to address these problems this study uses the large language model llm to identify the drawing contents of 1096 children’s scientific drawings covering 6 scientific concepts and uses the word2vec algorithm to calculate their semantic similarity.
the study explores whether there are consistent drawing representations among children with the same theme and attempts to establish a norm for children’s scientific drawings providing a baseline reference for following children’s drawing research.
the results showed that there were significant differences in the consistency of children’s representations of different concepts and there was a possibility of consistency bias that is the appearance of consistency representations misled llm.
at the same time linear regression tests were used to analyze the relevant factors that affect children’s representation.
the results show that sample size and teaching strategies can affect the accuracy of llm’s image recognition while the degree of conceptual abstraction may affect the consistency of representation."
 these authors cosupervised this work
"regulation of the transcriptome to promote meiosis is important for sperm development and fertility.
however how chromatin remodeling directs the transcriptome during meiosis in male germ cells is largely unknown.
here we demonstrate that the iswi family atpdependent chromatin remodeling factor smarca5 snf2h plays a critical role in regulating meiotic prophase progression during spermatogenesis.
males with germ cellspecific depletion of smarca5 are infertile and unable to form sperm.
loss of smarca5 results in failure of meiotic progression with abnormal spermatocytes beginning at the pachytene stage and an aberrant global increase in chromatin accessibility especially at genes important for meiotic prophase."
"research on the understudied solute carrier slc superfamily of membrane transporters would greatly profit from a comprehensive knowledgebase synthesizing data and knowledge on different aspects of slc function.
we consolidated multiomics data sets with selected curated information from the public domain such as structure prediction substrate annotation disease association and subcellular localization.
this slccentric knowledge is made accessible to the scientific community via a web portal featuring interactive dashboards and a tool for familywide treebased visualization of slc properties.
making use of the systematically collected and curated data sets we selected eight featuredimensions to compute an integrated functional landscape of human slcs.
this landscape represents various functional aspects harmonizing local and global features of the underlying data sets as demonstrated by inspecting structural folds and subcellular locations of selected transporters.
based on all available data sets and their integration we assigned a biochemicalbiological function to each slc making it one of the largest systematic annotations of human gene function and likely acting as a blueprint for future endeavours."
in the last 20 years
"antihiv envelope broadly neutralizing antibodies bnabs are alternatives to conventional antiretrovirals with the potential to prevent and treat infection reduce latent reservoirs andor mediate a functional cure.
clinical trials with first generation bnabs used alone or in combination show promising antiviral effects but also highlight that additional engineering of enhanced antibodies will be required for optimal clinical utility while preserving or enhancing cgmp manufacturing capability.
here we report the engineering of an anticd4 bindingsite cd4bs bnab n49p9.3 purified from the plasma of an hiv eliteneutralizer.
through a series of rational modifications we produced a variant that demonstrates enhanced potency superior antiviral activity in combination with other bnabs low polyreactivity and longer circulating halflife.
additional engineering for manufacturing produced a final variant en49p9 with properties conducive to cgmp production.
overall these efforts demonstrate the feasibility of developing enhanced anticd4bs bnabs with greatly improved antiviral properties as well as potential translational value."
"damage to the plasma membrane pm is common in all types of cells.
pm repair processes including exocytosis and endocytosis are not mutually exclusive rather they collaborate to repair the wound.
however the temporal coordination between the repair processes remains poorly understood.
here by comprehensively identifying pm repair proteins we resolved the temporal pm repair processes at the damage site in saccharomyces cerevisiae.
of the 80 repair proteins identified 72 proteins were previously unreported repair protein candidates.
we showed that polarity establishment polarized exocytosis and clathrinmediated endocytosis cme occur in a specific temporal order at the damage site.
furthermore we showed that polarized exocytosis and cme are coupled at the damage site delivering pm repair proteins with transmembrane domains between the growing bud site and the damage site.
this study provides insights into the temporal dynamics of coordinated cellular response to pm damage."
"as personalized cancer vaccines advance precise modeling of antigen presentation by mhc class i and ii is crucial.
highquality training data is essential for clinical models.
existing deep learning models focus on prediction performance but lack interpretability.
we introduce pep2vec a modular transformerbased model trained on mhc i and ii ligandome data transforming input sequences into interpretable vectors.
this approach integrates source protein features and elucidates the source of its performance gains revealing regions that correlate with gene expression and proteinprotein interactions.
pep2vecs peptide latent space shows relationships between peptides of varying mhc class allotype lengths and submotifs.
this enables identifying four major contaminant types constituting 5.0 of our data.
pep2vec enhances mhc presentation prediction achieving higher average precision on our presentation test set and immunogenicity datasets than existing models and reducing contaminantlike peptide recommendations.
pep2vec addresses a critical need for the development of more precise and effective applications of peptide mhc models such as for cancer vaccines and antibody deimmunization."
"while traits that contribute to premating sexual interactions are known to be wildly diverse much less is known about the diversity of postmating especially female reproductive traits and the mechanisms shaping this diversity.
to assess the rate pattern and potential drivers of postmating reproductive trait evolution we analyzed male and female traits across up to 30"
"during vertebrate neurogenesis a progressive transition from symmetric proliferative to asymmetric neurogenic progenitor divisions is critical to balance growth and differentiation.
we used singlecell rnaseq data from chick embryonic neural tube to characterize the molecular mechanisms that drive this transition.
here we show that cdkn1c a key cell cycle regulator which is classically associated with neuronal cell cycle exit plays an earlier role during neurogenesis by favoring a shift towards neurogenic mode of division.
cdkn1c expression progressively increases in neural progenitors and its knock down leads to a reduction of neuron production following a shortening of cell cycle mainly attributed to a reduction in g1 duration.
clonal analysis of pairs of sister cells indicates that reducing cdkn1c expression in progenitors delays neurogenesis by favoring a symmetric proliferative mode of division.
combined cyclind1 and cdkn1c knockdowns restores the cell cycle defects and a wildtype distribution of modes of division indicating that cdkn1c acts via the regulation of cell cycle parameters.
we propose a sequential role for cdkn1c in neuron production with its progressive expression in progenitors first promoting neurogenic division patterns via cellcycle lengthening before mediating cell cycle exit in daughter cells."
"in recent years we have seen a significant increase in our understanding of the mechanisms of development regeneration and healing of the respiratory system.
however most of these studies have been limited by their focus on mammalian systems.
here we aimed to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms that are active during lung growth and tissue repair in amphibians specifically xenopus tropicalis .
first we analyzed the stem cell composition and signaling pathways that are active in epithelial and mesenchymal cells during lung growth.
then we established a protocol for lung injury to assess the types of stem cells underlying tissue repair.
in mammals sftpc at2 cells are alveolar stem cells that can differentiate to krt8 cells during lung homeostasis and postinjury repair.
in this study we identified sftpc cells and krt8 cells along with the activity of key developmental signaling pathways hippo and wnt during lung maturation at postmetamorphosis stages.
we then established a protocol for lung injury using chemically induced injury with bleomycin which damages the lung through oxidative stress.
the results show an elevation in collagen postinjury indicating bleomycin’s effect in causing lung fibrosis.
froglets survived 42 days postinjury with a continuous decrease in fibrosis.
to explore this effect we analyzed the distribution of lung stem cells sox9 protein levels and sftp gene expression were downregulated at the alveoli 42 days postinjury.
the decrease in stem cell marker expression 42 days postinjury suggests they are differentiating as part of the healing process.
nevertheless we could still detect them after a few weeks of healing.
these results suggest that  has a regenerative capacity for lung tissue repair and that the same signaling pathways and stem cells are active in both amphibians and mammalian lungs during lung growth regeneration and healing.
these findings show for the first time the physiological similarities between the anuran and the mammalian lung during growth and tissue repair processes suggesting  as a potential animal model to study lung regeneration."
" is a major opportunistic human pathogen which causes both noninvasive and invasive disease.
the"
"exploring a species’ paleohistory is crucial for understanding its responsiveness to climatic events identifying drivers of adaptation and developing effective biodiversity conservation strategies in the face of ongoing climate change.
we analyzed 200 genomes of the perennial herb woodland strawberry"
"oligonucleotides or gene fragments can be ligated in a specified order to create longer dna assemblies.
we present a method where dna symbols or oligos designed to encode information for data storage are joined to linker sequences at either end.
these linkers dictate the assembly order of the symbols the order of the symbols can be changed by changing the sequences of the linkers attached to them.
utilizing a ligating dnazyme as a catalytic splint we achieve roomtemperature enzymefree assembly offering a costeffective alternative to traditional enzymebased ligation methods.
we demonstrate this technique by assembling three different fivesymbol constructs with the order of the symbols determined by their linking ends.
this linker directed assembly technique allows dataencoding symbols to be assembled in any desired order.
furthermore the dnazymebased assembly method is versatile and can be applied to various dna assembly applications particularly where costeffectiveness and efficient roomtemperature ligation are required."
"the epidemiological transition from young to old deaths in highincome countries reduced mortality at all ages but a major role was played by a decline of infant and child mortality from infectious diseases that greatly increased life expectancy at birth.
over time declines in infectious disease continue but chronic and degenerative causes persist so we might expect under5 deaths to be concentrated in the first month of life.
however little is known about the agepattern of this transition in early mortality or its potential limits.
here we first describe the limit using detailed data on denmark japan france and the usa— developed countries with low under5 mortality.
the limiting pattern of under5 deaths concentrates in the first month but is surprisingly dispersed over later ages we call this the early rectangularization of mortality.
then we examine the progress towards this limit of 31 developing countries from subsaharan africa ssa—the region with the highest under5 mortality"
"fullscan mass spectrometry ms data from both liquid chromatography lc and ms imaging capture multiple ion forms including their insource fragments.
here we leverage such fragments to structurally annotate fullscan data from lcms or ms imaging by matching against peak intensity scaled tandem ms spectral libraries using precursortolerant reverse match scoring.
applied to inflammatory bowel disease and imaging datasets we show the approach facilitates reanalyses of data in public repositories."
"reproducibility in organ size and shape is a fascinating trait of living organisms.
the mechanisms underlying such robustness remain however to be elucidated.
taking the sepal of arabidopsis as a model we investigated whether variability of gene expression plays a role in variation of organ morphology.
previous work from our team identified cellwall related genes as being enriched among the genes whose expression is highly variable.
we then hypothesized that the variation of measured morphological parameters in cellwall related single knockout mutants could be correlated with the variation in gene expression of the corresponding gene the knockedout gene in wildtype plants.
we analyzed sepal morphology from 16 cellwall mutants and found that unexpectedly the higher a gene is expressed in wild type the more variable the size of the corresponding mutant.
these findings support a contribution of cellwall related genes to the robustness of sepal size."
"background hepatocellular carcinoma hcc ranks third in cancerrelated deaths worldwide with limited therapeutic options.
while niclosamide nic has shown potential for repurposing in hcc its poor water solubility and low bioavailability limit its efficacy and its mechanisms of action are not yet fully elucidated.
methods we designed a watersoluble nic prodrug nicps and evaluated its efficacy through in vitro and in vivo studies including pharmacokinetic pk and pharmacodynamic pd assays hcc patientderived xenograft pdx models were applied in two independent experiments vasorin vasn knockout models and combination treatments with nicps and sorafenib or antipdl1 antibody.
bioinformatic analyses and western blotting were used to investigate nicpsprime or minutes target vasn and related signaling pathways.
results nicps exhibited a tenfold increase in oral bioavailability and reduced tumor volume by over 75 in hcc pdx models.
nicps directly binds and suppresses vasn suppressing tgflower case greek beta signaling and reducing smad23 phosphorylation.
vasn inhibition led to a 50 tumor reduction and nicps enhanced responses to sorafenib and antipdl1 therapy.
conclusions nicps equal to 36 of nic in molecular weight offers improved bioavailability efficacy and a novel mechanism of action in targeting vasn showing promise for hcc treatment alone or in combination therapy."
"seminal fluid proteins sfps are essential for reproductive success and evolve fast possibly driven by postcopulatory sexual selection pcss originating from sperm competition and cryptic female choice.
counterintuitively however the coding region only in few sfps evolves adaptively.
hence additional genomic and functional factors must play a role in sfp evolution independent of the protein coding region.
to shed light on drivers of sfp evolution we focus on those sfps predominantly expressed in male accessory glands because this allows examination of their evolution in the tissue which produces the majority of sfps.
moreover accessory glands develop normally in hybrids in contrast to testis allowing to control for changes in cellular environment arising during speciation.
here we discover that acp promoters contain hot spots for rapid evolution from accumulation of sequence changes and insertionsdeletions indels.
we further show that changes in promoter sequences are accompanied by gene expression divergence among closely related  species.
we then validate these observations in"
"carboxysomes are polyhedral protein organelles that microorganisms use to facilitate carbon dioxide assimilation.
they are composed of a modular protein shell which envelops an enzymatic core mainly comprised of physically coupled rubisco and carbonic anhydrase.
while the modular construction principles of carboxysomes make them attractive targets as customizable metabolic platforms their size and complexity can be a hinderance.
in this work we design and validate a plasmid set – the pxpressome toolkit in which αcarboxysomes are robustly expressed and remain intact and functional after purification.
we tested this toolkit by introducing mutations which influence carboxysome structure and performance.
we find that deletion of vertexcapping genes results in formation of larger carboxysomes while deletion of facet forming genes produces smaller particles suggesting that adjusting the ratio of these proteins can rationally affect morphology.
through a series of fluorescently labeled constructs we observe this toolkit leads to more uniform expression and better cell health than previously published carboxysome expression systems.
overall the pxpressome toolkit facilitates the study and redesign of carboxysomes with robust performance and improved phenotype uniformity.
the pxpressome toolkit will support efforts to remodel carboxysomes for enhanced carbon fixation or serve as a platform for other nanoencapsulation goals."
"to elaborate on the origins of the established malefemale differences in several brainrelated phenotypes we assessed the patterns of transcriptomic sex biases in the developing and adult human forebrain.
we find an abundance of sex differences in expression sexde in the prenatal brain driven by both hormonal and sexchromosomal factors and considerable consistency in the sex effects between the developing and adult brain with little sexde exclusive to the adult forebrain.
sexde was not enriched in genes associated with brain disorder consistent with systematic differences in the characteristics of these genes e.g.
constraint.
yet the genes with persistent sexde across lifespan were overrepresented in disease gene coregulation networks pointing to their potential to mediate sex biases in brain phenotypes.
altogether our work highlights the prenatal development as a crucial timepoint for the establishment of brain sex differences."
"the selective autophagy receptor p62sqstm1 from hereon p62 is known to form higherorder filaments in vitro and to undergo liquidliquid phase separation when mixed with polyubiquitin.
we determined the fulllength cryoem structure of p62 and elucidated a structured double helical filament scaffold associated with the pb1domain and the flexible cterminal part residing in the lumen and the solventaccessible major groove.
at different ph values and upon binding to soluble lc3 lc3conjugated membranes and polyubiquitin we observed p62 filament rearrangements in the form of structural unwinding disassembly lateral association and bundling respectively.
in the cellular environment under conditions of atg5 knockdown leading to stalled autophagy we imaged highcontrast layers consisting of p62 oligomers enwrapping lipid droplets by cryogenic electron tomography in cellulo which we identified as calcium phosphate by compositional spectroscopy analysis.
together we visualized the cellular ultrastructure of p62 oligomers with high calcium content as a potential intermediate step of autophagy initiation."
"estuaries are important components of the global carbon cycle exchanging carbon between aquatic atmospheric and terrestrial environments representing important loci for blue carbon storage and greenhouse gas emissions.
estuarine particles are especially important due to their microbial transformation and verticalhorizontal transport.
we used metagenomes and metatranscriptomes to assess changes in microbial community composition and functions across the elbe estuary over one year linking changes to dissolved and particulate organic matter.
we will be the first to link microbial activity derived from molecular data to particulate and dissolved organic carbon characteristics.
there were no microbial species responses to the measured physicochemical and dissolvedparticulate organic matter parameters however weighted correlation network analyses showed significant spatial microbiome differences linked to the estuarine salinity profile.
meanwhile suspended and sinking particle fractions did not show any community wide differences but individual gene analyses revealed clear microbial lifestyle differences.
sinking particleassociated transcripts highly expressed competition and stressresponses genes while suspended particleassociated transcripts favoured energy acquisition and growth.
transcription patterns further indicate that suspended particles may represent a mitigating influence on methane release via methanotrophy while both suspended and sinking particles produce methane through the same gene complex.
this notion suggests that increased sinking particle abundance such as under high turbidity conditions leads to increased methane production.
our findings further imply that urban activities such as dredging may have a high impact on greenhouse gas emissions and higher suspendedsinking particle ratios may alleviate aquaticatmospheric methane exchanges.
future studies should explore in detail the underlying mechanisms and controlling variables in particular when taking predicted global changes into account."
"climate change poses significant challenges to agriculture and food security particularly through its effects on insect vector populations and the pathogens they transmit.
aphids are one of the biggest group of ectotherms that transmit viruses to plants more than 200 species have been identified as pathogen vectors.
these aphids are responsible for transmitting over 300 viruses.
the lifehistory traits of aphids such as fecundity and survival respond strongly and nonlinearly to temperature and therefore to global warming.
in this study we elaborate the thermal responses for the main lifehistory traits i.e development and mortality rate for aphid species for which data were available or generated.
also thermal responses for virus transmission rates were elaborated to describe plant host to vector and vector to plant host dynamics.
with these data we elaborated thermal suitability models which were used to map current and projected scenarios for the transmission of viruses by aphids.
data was only availablegenerated for 19 aphid species many of which only have data either at the lower or upper thermal limits.
for virus transmission rates from host plant to vector and from vector to plant data was only availablegenerated for potato virus y pvy potato virus a pva and potato leaf roll virus plrv transmitted by the aphid"
"dorsal closure is a process that occurs during embryogenesis of drosophila melanogaster.
during dorsal closure the amnioserosa as a onecell thick epithelial tissue that fills the dorsal opening shrinks as the lateral epidermis sheets converge and eventually merge.
during this process both shape index and aspect ratio of amnioserosa cells increase markedly.
the standard 2dimensional vertex model which successfully describes tissue sheet mechanics in multiple contexts would in this case predict that the tissue should fluidize via cell neighbor changes.
surprisingly however the amnioserosa remains an elastic solid with no such events.
we here present a minimal extension to the vertex model that explains how the amnioserosa can achieve this unexpected behavior.
we show that continuous shrinkage of the preferred cell perimeter and cell perimeter polydispersity lead to the retention of the solid state of the amnioserosa.
our model accurately captures measured cell shape and orientation changes and predicts nonmonotonic junction tension that we confirm with laser ablation experiments."
"despite the improvements in clinical outcomes for patients with diffuse large bcell lymphoma dlbcl a significant proportion of those patients still face challenges with refractoryrelapsed rr disease after receiving firstline rchop treatment.
characterizing the heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment tme in diffuse large b cell lymphoma dlbcl is crucial for understanding relapsedrefractory disease.
however the complex and diverse nature of the tme has impeded progress.
here using singlecell rna sequencingscrnaseq we explored the dlbcl landscape at singlecell resolution profiling 77344 cells from both primary and relapsed dlbcl patients.
we further investigated the shared and distinct molecular and cellular features of tumor microenvironment in both primary and relapsed dlbcl tumors by integrating nextgeneration dna sequencing data and multiple scrnaseq datasets from total 72351 cells.
our results demonstrated that there was a significant decrease of cd4cxcr5pd1 tfh cells along with excessive activation of the tnfnfκb signaling pathways in malignant b cells in rr disease.
furthermore by using multiplex ihc we confirmed that cd4cxcr5pd1 tfh cells are prognostic and predictive biomarkers for response to rchop treatment.
as a proof of concept we successfully generated mutilplexed images of cd4cxcr5pd1 tfh cells from a single dapi staining in human dlbcl tissues through using generative artificial intelligence.
our study offers critical insights into the heterogeneity and molecular features of dlbcl shedding light on the crucial role of cd4cxcr5pd1 tfh cells in the recurrent process."
"vast sequencing data in public repositories offer researchers unprecedented opportunities for gaining insights through reanalysis and machine learning approaches thereby advancing the microbiology field.
however the lack of standardized metadata poses a significant obstacle to big data reuse necessitating advanced bioinformatics skills for curation and integration."
"bovine tuberculosis btb is a major disease of cattle that is subject to an eradication strategy in england.
to inform control policies and manage the epidemic all potential sources of infection for cattle must be identified and understood.
the causative agent of btb"
"this study demonstrates a silicon nanopillar metasurface coupled with localized surface plasmon resonance lspr mediated by the presence of cephalexin antibiotics in solution for biosensing applications.
a facile fabrication process was developed to create the metasurface on silicon wafers with a unique resonance signature.
the resulting metasurface consists of periodic nanopillars approximately 180 nm in diameter 210 nm deep and with a controlled edgetoedge separation of 200 nm.
these dimensions were chosen based on a finite element method simulation that was used to investigate the ideal parameters to produce the desired resonance effect in the metasurface reflection spectra.
optimization of the nanopillar surface properties and the sidewall angle allowed for replication of the simulations.
this metasurface was coupled with bsacoated gold nanospheres bsans to mediate the redshift of peak resonance wavelength values occurring only in the presence of the antibiotic linker.
the device fabricated herein exhibits a significant 22 nm wavelength shift resulting from changes to the local refractive index in the presence of the bsansantibiotic coupling.
further enhancement of the binding events is promoted by the lspr hot spots formed between the nanoparticles and the metasurface allowing for sensitive and realtime detection."
"the integration through hybridization of the dd genome into domesticated tetraploid wheat gave rise to allohexaploid wheat the most cultivated wheat globally growing across diverse environmental conditions.
however the regulatory basis of this integration on increased environmental adaptability in allohexaploid remains largely unexplored.
here we investigated the change of transcriptome epigenome as well as the chromatin interactome and metabolome in three independent polyploidization events representing dd genome integration.
our findings reveal that polyploidization events induce the activation of defenserelated genes through comprehensive reorganization of epigenome and chromatin architecture.
dd integration not only brings an additional gene copy but also activates the homoeologs existing in the a and b subgenomes through chromatin interactions.
furthermore secondary metabolites represented by alkaloids and flavonoids that are crucial for environmental adaptation are significantly enriched following polyploidization.
thus hexaploid wheat exhibits enhanced tolerance to alkalinity uvb light stress and high salt conditions was observed.
these results highlight the indispensable role of dd genome integration in the adaptability of allohexaploid wheat during its evolution."
"shifts in life history traits such as timing of reproduction can help mediate population declines following perturbations and early reproduction should be favoured when adult survival is impacted more than juvenile survival.
in tasmanian devils following the emergence of a fatal transmissible cancer females started to breed precocially i.e.
at age one instead of typically age two and the same time as populations started to decline following disease emergence.
here we focus on a diseased site freycinet peninsula tasmania australia with 18 years of continuous markrecapture data to test  whether rates of precocial breeding in females continued to increase after the initial rise after the emergence of the disease  whether there was a relationship between body size and breeding success for either oneyearolds or adult females i.e.
at least twoyearsold and"
"hiv1 infection requires lifelong therapy with antiretroviral drugs due to the existence of a latent reservoir of transcriptionally inactive integrated proviruses.
the goal of hiv1 cure research is to eliminate or functionally silence this reservoir.
to this end there are numerous ongoing studies to evaluate immunologic approaches including monoclonal antibody therapies.
evaluating the results of these studies requires sensitive and specific measures of the reservoir.
here we describe a relatively high throughput combined quantitative polymerase chain reaction qpcr and next generation sequencing method.
four different qpcr probes covering the packaging signal  groupspecific antigen  polymerase  and envelope  are combined in a single multiplex reaction to detect the hiv1 genome in limiting dilution samples followed by sequence verification of individual reactions that are positive for combinations of any 2 of the 4 probes q4pcr.
this sensitive and specific approach allows for an unbiased characterization of the hiv1 latent reservoir."
"background the intercalated disc id electromechanically couples adjacent cardiomyocytes.
alteration of this structure plays a central role in cardiac arrhythmias notably arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy acm an inherited genetic disorder of desmosomes.
calciumcalmodulindependent serine protein kinase cask a costameric component of the lateral membrane regulates cardiomyocyte protein trafficking.
here we investigated cask regulation of the organization of id components in normal and pathological contexts.
here we investigated cask regulation of the organization of id components in normal and pathological contexts.
methods we studied the outcomes of cask depletion in neonatal rat hearts using a cardiacspecific adenoassociated virus strategy.
we used conventional and strain echocardiography hemodynamics electrocardiography histology and gene and protein expression studies to characterize adult rat hearts.
we also studied the effects of cask depletion in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes nrvm and control and acm pkp2 ips cellderived cm hipscm using proteomics electron microscopy highresolution imaging mechanoscanning ion conductance microscopy mechanosicm and stress resistance tests.
we studied cardiac cask expression and localization in human acm and nontransplantable control hearts.
results depletion of cask in our multiple experimental models revealed that cask regulates cardiomyocyte ids.
in rats cask depletion improved contractile reserve and compliance.
in cultured rat cardiomyocytes cask knockdown increased localization of connexin 43 cx43 and pkp2 at ids resulting in increased contact stiffness.
in pkp2 hipscms cask expression was increased.
cask depletion in these cells promoted pkp2 accumulation at cell contacts formation of desmosomelike structures and stress resistance.
in the right ventricles of acm patients cask protein level was also increased and cask abnormally localized at the id.
conclusion cask functions as a repressor of id organization and tissue cohesion suggesting novel mechanisms for regulating id structure and function.
these observations along with cask upregulation and mislocalization in acm open up new perspectives on understanding the pathophysiology of acm and suggest innovative strategies for its treatment."
"obesity is a complex chronic disease characterized by excessive adiposity and associations with numerous comorbidities including cancer.
despite extensive research we have limited understanding of the mechanisms coupling obesity to cancer risk and of the contexts in which obesity does or does not exacerbate disease.
here we show that chronic highfat diet hfdinduced obesity has no significant effect on the  mouse a model of human lifraumeni multicancer syndrome.
surprisingly despite inducing rapid and highly penetrant obesity and longterm differences in metabolic and adiposity greater than one year of hfd had no significant effect on survival or tumor burden.
these findings were replicated in two separate cohorts and thus provide important negative data for the field.
given strong publication bias against negative data in the literature this large cohort study represents a clear case where chronic dietinduced obesity does not accelerate or aggravate cancer outcomes.
the data thus carry high impact for researchers funders and policymakers alike."
many immunotherapies focus on reinvigorating cd8
"rbfox1 regulates transcriptional networks linked to synaptic transmission and neurodevelopment.
mutations in the  gene are associated with psychiatric disorders but how rbfox1 influences psychiatric disorder vulnerability remains unclear.
recent studies showed that rbfox1 mediates the alternative splicing of  a critical hpa axis activator.
further rbfox1 dysfunction is linked to dysregulation of bdnftrkb a pathway promoting neuroplasticity neuronal survival and stress resilience.
hence rbfox1 dysfunction may increase psychiatric disorder vulnerability via hpa axis dysregulation leading to disrupted development and allostatic overload.
to test this hypothesis we generated a zebrafish  loss of function lof line and examined behavioural and molecular effects during development.
in larvae and adults  lof resulted in hyperactivity impulsivity and hyperarousal and alterations in proliferation fertility and survival traits associated with allostatic overload.
in larvae  lof disrupted expression of  and hpi axis genes.
these latter were restored after chronic trkb agonistantagonist treatment.
in adults  and hpi axes dysregulation was only seen following acute stress.
our findings revealed a strict interplay between rbfox1 and bdnftrkb in stress resilience and suggest that  lof predisposes to psychiatric diseases through hpa axis hyperactivation during development impairing adaptation and heightening vulnerability to allostatic overload."
"budding yeast employs a variety of survival strategies in response to starvation including pseudohyphal development invasive growth and sporulation.
here we report an innate pathway of viability resurgence in quiescent time vrqt by aged cultures to preserve and expand the population survivorship.
without additional nutrients a few stationaryphase cells synchronously enter mitosis increasing the population viability that does not likely result from mutations.
vrqt is a population densitydependent collective behavior that can be triggered by quorum sensing aromatic alcohols.
genetic analyses demonstrate that vrqt is independent of many canonical pathways for cell growth development or stress responses.
this community survival program allows yeast to proactively extend vitality amidst a common nutritional crisis.
wild strains isolated from clinical samples exhibit vrqt suggesting that this survival mechanism must be considered when treating human infections."
molecular detection of
"inhibition of proliferation upon contact is a critical cell density control mechanism governed by the hippo signalling pathway.
the biochemical signalling underlying cell density dependent cues regulating hippo signalling and its downstream effectors yap remains poorly understood.
here we reveal that the tight junction protein zo2 is required for the contactmediated inhibition of proliferation.
we additionally determined that the wellestablished molecular players of contact inhibition of proliferation namely hippo kinase lats1 and yap are regulated by zo2 and that the scaffolding function of zo2 promotes the interaction with and phosphorylation of yap by lats1.
mechanistically yap is phosphorylated when zo2 brings lats1 and yap together via its sh3 and pdz domains respectively subsequently leading to the cytoplasmic retention and inactivation of yap.
in conclusion we demonstrate that zo2 maintains hippo signalling pathway activation by promoting the stability of lats1 to inactivate yap."
"identifying accurate cell markers in singlecell rnaseq data is crucial for understanding cellular diversity and function.
localized marker detector lmd is a novel tool to identify localized genes  genes exclusively expressed in groups of highly similar cells  thereby characterizing cellular diversity in a multiresolution and finegrained manner.
lmd constructs a cellcell affinity graph diffuses the gene expression value across the cell graph and assigns a score to each gene based on its diffusion dynamics.
lmds candidate markers can be grouped into functional gene modules which accurately reflect cell types subtypes and other sources of variation such as cell cycle status.
we apply lmd to mouse bone marrow and hair follicle dermal condensate datasets where lmd facilitates crosssample comparisons identifying shared and samplespecific gene signatures and novel cell populations without requiring batch effect correction or integration methods.
furthermore we assessed the performance of lmd across nine singlecell rna sequencing datasets compared it with six other methods aimed at achieving similar objectives and found that lmd outperforms the other methods evaluated."
"although gut microbiota and lipid metabolites have been suggested to be closely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus t2dm the interactions between gut microbiota lipid metabolites and the host in t2dm development remains unclear.
rhesus macaques may be the best animal model to investigate these relationships given their spontaneous development of t2dm.
we identified eight spontaneous t2dm macaques and conducted a comprehensive study investigating the relationships using multiomics sequencing technology.
our results from 16s rrna metagenome metabolome and transcriptome analyses identified that gut microbiota imbalance tryptophan metabolism and fatty acid beta oxidation disorders longchain fatty acid lcfa accumulation and inflammation occurred in t2dm macaques.
we verified the accumulation of palmitic acid pa and activation of inflammation in t2dm macaques.
importantly mice transplanted with spontaneous t2dm macaque fecal microbiota and fed a high pa diet developed prediabetes within 120 days.
we determined that gut microbiota mediated the absorption of excess pa in the ileum resulting in the accumulation of pa in the serum consequently leading to t2dm in mice.
in particular we demonstrated that the specific microbiota composition was probably involved in the process.
this study provides new insight into interactions between microbiota and metabolites and confirms causative effect of gut microbiota on t2dm development."
"parameterization and a priori identifiability analysis are two interconnected steps that should be carried out in advance of model calibration.
in the first place we propose a framework for parameterizing a recently introduced and analytically studied generalization of the celebrated fisherkolmogorovpetrovskypiskunov fisherkpp reactiondiffusion redi equation with fractional polynomial fp terms to model heterogeneous nonlinear diffusion in the propagation of a given species through directed networks exemplified by the tauopathy progression in alzheimers disease ad.
next we present our results on identifiability in a generic sense for multiexperimental designs applicable to analytic and meromorphic systems including the suggested parameterized fpfisherkpp redi equations.
in particular the concept of generic local minimal dependence of unknown parameters and parameterized initial conditions will be formalized using oneparameter lie groups of transformations and a decomposition method to explore this new concept will be devised.
finally the allen mouse brain connectivity atlas ambca dataset is utilized to develop a model for tauopathy progression in the mouse brain which will subsequently be employed to implement the proposed methodology for analyzing a priori identifiability."
"despite the frequent implication of aberrant gene expression in diseases algorithms predicting aberrantly expressed genes of an individual are lacking.
to address this need we compiled an aberrant expression prediction benchmark covering 8.2 million rare variants from 633 individuals across 49 tissues.
while not geared toward aberrant expression the deleteriousness score cadd and the lossoffunction predictor loftee showed mild predictive ability 11.6 average precision.
leveraging these and further variant annotations we next trained abexp a model that yielded 12 average precision by combining in a tissuespecific fashion expression variability with variant effects on isoforms and on aberrant splicing.
integrating expression measurements from clinically accessible tissues led to another twofold improvement.
furthermore we show on uk biobank blood traits that performing rare variant association testing using the continuous and tissuespecific abexp variant scores instead of loftee variant burden increases gene discovery sensitivity and enables improved phenotype predictions."
"using a restricted set of behavioral responses corals must obtain sufficient light to maximize photosynthesis while simultaneously avoiding predation and molecular damage from uv radiation.
this study investigates the polyp behavioral response of the caribbean octocoral"
"βadrenergic blockers βblockers are extensively utilized in the treatment of various cardiovascular conditions.
however their direct effects on insulin secretion from pancreatic βcells remain largely unexplored.
this study investigates the impact of βblockers on insulin secretion utilizing min6k8 clonal βcells and mouse islets in vitro.
various nonselective and β1selective βblockers were found to amplify glucose and glimepirideinduced insulin secretion 1.52 fold.
surprisingly some of the βblockers propranolol and bisoprolol were found to increase camp production 510 fold via adenylyl cyclase the effects being dependent on α2adrenoceptors which suggests crossreactivity of these βblockers and their receptors.
propranololstimulated insulin secretion involves a novel signaling pathway mediated by protein kinase a pka ryanodine receptor 2 ryr2 and transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily m member 5 trpm5.
initially camp activates pka and triggers ryr2 phosphorylation and extracellular ca"
"sequencetofunction models that predict gene expression from genomic dna sequence have proven valuable for many biological tasks including understanding cisregulatory syntax and interpreting noncoding genetic variants.
however current stateoftheart models have been trained largely on bulk expression profiles from healthy tissues or cell lines and have not learned the properties of precise cell types and states that are captured in largescale singlecell transcriptomic datasets.
thus they lack the ability to perform these tasks at the resolution of specific cell types or states across diverse tissue and disease contexts.
to address this gap we present decima a model that predicts the cell type and condition specific expression of a gene from its surrounding dna sequence.
decima is trained on singlecell or singlenucleus rna sequencing data from over 22 million cells and successfully predicts the cell typespecific expression of unseen genes based on their sequence alone.
here we demonstrate decimas ability to reveal the cisregulatory mechanisms driving cell typespecific gene expression and its changes in disease to predict noncoding variant effects at cell type resolution and to design regulatory dna elements with precisely tuned contextspecific functions."
"deleterious germline ddx41 variants constitute the most common inherited predisposition disorder linked to myeloid neoplasms mns.
the role of ddx41 in hematopoiesis and how its germline and somatic mutations contribute to mns remain unclear.
here we show that ddx41 is essential for erythropoiesis but dispensable for the development of other hematopoietic lineages.
using stagespecific cre models for erythropoiesis we reveal that ddx41 knockout in early erythropoiesis is embryonically lethal while knockout in latestage terminal erythropoiesis allows mice to survive with normal blood counts.
ddx41 deficiency induces a significant upregulation of gquadruplexes g4 noncanonical dna structures that tend to accumulate in the early stages of erythroid precursors.
we show that ddx41 colocalizes with g4 on the erythroid genome.
ddx41 directly binds to and dissolves g4 which is significantly compromised in mnassociated ddx41 mutants.
accumulation of g4 by ddx41 deficiency induces erythroid genome instability defects in ribosomal biogenesis and upregulation of p53.
however p53 deficiency does not rescue the embryonic death of ddx41 hematopoieticspecific knockout mice.
in parallel genome instability also activates the cgassting pathway which is detrimental to survival since cgasdeficient and hematopoieticspecific ddx41 knockout mice are viable without detectable hematologic phenotypes although these mice continue to show erythroid ribosomal defects and upregulation of p53.
these findings are further supported by data from a ddx41 mutated mn patient and human ipscderived bone marrow organoids.
our study establishes ddx41 as a g4 dissolver essential for erythroid genome stability and suppressing the cgassting pathway."
"understanding and predicting the diverse conformational states of membrane proteins is essential for elucidating their biological functions.
despite advancements in computational methods accurately capturing these complex structural changes remains a significant challenge.
in this study we introduce a method for predicting diverse functional states of membrane protein conformations using a diffusion model.
our approach integrates forward and backward diffusion processes incorporating state classifiers and additional conditioners to control the generation gradient of conformational states.
we specifically target the ptype atpases a key membrane transporter for which we curated and expanded a structural dataset.
by employing a graph neural network with a custom membrane constraint our model generates precise structures for ptype atpases across different functional states.
this approach represents a significant step forward in computational structural biology and holds great potential for studying the dynamics of other membrane proteins."
"the current study aimed to optimize the fasting duration in order to mitigate the detrimental effects of heat stress on broilers raised in hot and humid climatic environments.
a total of 500 broiler docs were assigned to five distinct treatment groups tₒ nonfasted controlled temperature 2426℃ nfct t nonfasted heat stressed 3038℃ nfhs t 6 hours fasted heat stressed 6h fhs t 8 hours fasted heat stressed 8h fhs and t 10 hours fasted heat stressed 10h fhs.
each treatment was replicated five times with 20 birds in each replicate group.
as expected the birds in nfct group showed significantly better performances for all the growth parameters although birds who fasted for 8h under heat stress exerted better growth and fcr in comparison to the other hs groups.
fasting of birds under heat stress significantly showed the lowest mortality.
like the nfct group birds in 8h fhs achieved significantly higher dressing percentage breast meat liver yields and the lowest abdominal fat.
fasting for 8 and 10h significantly increased breast meat ph and water holding capacity and thus reduced cooking loss.
fasting also improved the breast meat color quality by increasing redness a and reducing the hue angle values comparable with the nfct group.
a significantly upward trend in villi height vh width vw and crypt depth cd of gut segments was also observed in the birds of the 8h fhs group.
total bacterial and coliform counts in cecum contents were reduced significantly with the increase in the fasting period.
benefitcost analysis showed better profitability in the 8h fhs group than other hs groups.
taken altogether it can be concluded that broiler chicken exposed to 8h fasting period is an effective approach to mitigate heat stress under hot and humid climatic conditions."
"certain mutations can confer neomorphic gain of function gof activities to the p53 protein that affect cancer progression.
yet the concept of mutant p53 gof has been challenged.
here using various strategies to alter the status of mutant versions of p53 in different cell lines we demonstrate that mutant p53 stimulates cancer cell invasion in threedimensional environments.
mechanistically mutant p53 enhances rhoarockdependent cell contractility and cellmediated extracellular matrix ecm reorganization via increasing mevalonate pathwaydependent rhoa localization to the membrane.
in line with this rhoadependent proinvasive activity is also mediated by idi1 a mevalonate pathway product.
further the invasionenhancing effect of mutant p53 is dictated by the biomechanical properties of the surrounding ecm thereby adding a cellindependent layer of regulation to mutant p53 gof activity that is mediated by dynamic reciprocal cellecm interactions.
together our findings link mutant p53 metabolic gof activity with an invasive cellular phenotype in physiologically relevant and contextdependent settings."
"background the time courses of the joint elevation angles of the thigh shank and foot in one stride during walking can be well approximated by a plane in a triaxial space.
this intersegmental coordination ic of the lower limb elevation angles is called planar covariation law.
thickness of the ic plane is associated with gait variability.
research question how are anteroposterior and lateral gait variabilities influenced by sinusoidal speed changes with different amplitudes ±0.33 vs. ±0.67 ms and periods 30 vs. 60 s which limbs are responsible for the step variabilities in these conditions methods we quantified the ic plane thickness coefficient of variance of step width cvsw time delay of step length tdsl and step frequency tdsf in 18 healthy young adults.
we applied statistical parametric mapping for the time courses of each limb angle during the acceleration and deceleration phases.
results the ic plane thickness was greater in the ±0.67 ms condition than in the ±0.33 ms condition.
periods and amplitudes did not affect cvsw tdsl and tdsf.
in the middle gait cycle the thigh and shank were delayed in the greater amplitude condition during the acceleration phase but proceeded in the same condition during the deceleration phase.
significance sinusoidal speed amplitude influenced anteroposterior gait variability but not lateral gait variability regardless of period even in healthy young adults.
more distal limbs were delayed in the greater speed amplitude condition during the acceleration phase whereas more proximal limbs proceeded in that condition during the deceleration phase indicating that these different behaviors of the lower limb segments could be related to step variabilities."
"jcvisyn3b syn3b a minimal synthetic bacterium that only possesses essential genes facilitates the examination of heterogeneous gene functions in minimal life.
conventionally"
"the synthetic notch receptor synnotch system is a versatile platform that induces gene transcription in response to extracellular signals.
however its application has been largely confined to membranebound targets due to specific activation requirements.
whether synnotch can also target extracellular protein aggregates such as amyloid beta aβ in alzheimer′s disease ad is unclear.
to address this we engineered an aβtargeting synnotch receptor controlling the production of chimeric humanmouse versions of lecanemab leqembi® or aducanumab aduhelm® both fdaapproved antibodies for ad.
we demonstrate that nih 3t3 cells expressing this synnotch system detect and respond to extracellular aβ aggregates by synthesizing and secreting aducanumab or lecanemab.
these findings broaden the potential applications of synnotch extending its targets beyond membranebound proteins to extracellular protein aggregates providing obvious benefits to research in this scientific arena."
"environmental stresses such as drought and salt adversely affect plant growth and crop productivity.
while many studies have focused on established components of stress signaling pathways research on unknown elements remains limited.
in this study we collected rna sequencing rnaseq data from"
"gene editing and protein tagging are at the heart of modern developmental and cell biology.
the advent of crisprcas9 based methods offers the possibility to develop customized approaches for genomic manipulations in nonclassical experimental models.
here we show that highly efficient somatic knockins of long dna fragments can be achieved in the developing chick neural tube in ovo.
we compare different types of repair matrices and different methods for the delivery of the crisprcas9 machinery and find that an all plasmidbased approach and short arms of homology provide an easy and efficient method to achieve high frequencies of knockin insertions with virtually no background signal.
we use this method to target fluorescent reporters and dynamically monitor the subcellular distribution of endogenously expressed tagged proteins as well as to insert the gal4vp16 transcription factor or the cre recombinase at specific loci to label neural subpopulations in the chick embryonic spinal cord.
finally we show that the method can also be applied to target the epiblast and somitic mesoderm."
"during cell division dna replication stalls upon alcoholderived interstrand crosslink employing dna repair pathways.
acetaldehyde a toxic metabolite of alcohol can induce dna crosslinks between complementary dna strands causing significant genomic instability.
the repair of acetaldehyde dna crosslinks aaicls is vital for maintaining genome integrity and preventing mutagenic events.
the fanconi anemia fa repair pathways involvement in fixing the aaicls is crucial ensuring cellular homeostasis and safeguarding genomic stability.
dysregulation of the fa pathway has been linked to fanconi anemia a rare genetic disorder characterized by hypersensitivity to dnadamaging agents including acetaldehyde.
however the precise mechanism of the repair and incision of aaicls is unknown.
here we demonstrate the role of the fa pathway nuclease slx4xpfercc1 sxe in the repair of aaicl.
we have generated sitespecific aaicl within the replication fork and we found sxe to excise the crosslink from the replication fork bringing evidence of its role in the repair of alcoholinduced dna lesions.
this nuclease complex performs two precise incisions around the lesion.
we also demonstrate that the sxe nuclease excises an abasic site interstrand crosslink in a similar manner.
given the evidence in conjunction with previous repair studies that have been conducted our work suggests that sxe is a versatile nuclease complex."
"instructors can provide feedback to their class in multiple ways.
one way is through their followup behaviors which are the specific strategies instructors implement after active learning activities.
these behaviors could play an important role in student learning as students can receive feedback from the instructor.
however there is little research on the effects of different types of followup behaviors.
followup after active learning can be seen as a form of discourse between the instructor and the entire class.
previous researchers developed the classroom discourse observation protocol cdop to analyze discourse between the instructor and individual students or small groups.
we used cdop as a starting point to develop and validate a new protocol the followup discourse observation protocol fudop to characterize instructional followup behaviors to the entire class after activelearning activities.
we then used fudop to characterize followup behaviors of multiple instructors in introductory biology courses at three different universities.
we measured consistent differences in these behaviors across instructors but not within instructors demonstrating that instructors may engage in consistent followup behaviors.
fudop could allow instructors and researchers to better measure and analyze followup behaviors and their effects which could in turn provide guidance to instructors and faculty developers."
"activating kras mutations are a key feature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma pda and drive tumor initiation and progression.
however mutant kras by itself is weakly oncogenic.
the pathways that cooperate with mutant kras to induce tumorigenesis are lessdefined.
analyzing organoids and murine and human pancreatic specimens we found that the receptor tyrosine kinase fgfr2 was progressively upregulated in mutant krasdriven metaplasia preneoplasia and classical pda.
using genetic mouse models we showed that fgfr2 supported mutant krasdriven transformation of acinar cells by promoting proliferation and mapk pathway activation.
fgfr2 abrogation significantly delayed tumor formation and extended the survival of these mice.
furthermore we discovered that fgfr2 collaborated with egfr and dual blockade of these receptor signaling pathways significantly reduced mutant krasinduced preneoplastic lesion formation.
together our data have uncovered a pivotal role for fgfr2 in the early phases of pancreatic tumorigenesis paving the way for future therapeutic applications of fgfr2 inhibitors for pancreatic cancer interception."
"here we present stformer a foundation model which incorporates ligand genes within the spatial niche into transformer encoder of singlecell transcriptomics.
we demonstrate that despite a moderate pretraining data size the spatially informed gene representations generated by stformer more consistently cluster cells more accurately encode hierarchy and membership within receptordependent gene networks remarkably boost identification of ligandreceptor interaction pairs and could simulate perturbation effects of ligandreceptor interactions on downstream targets."
 the author contributed to the discussion of this work.
